[Illustration:

  “LANDED WITH BOTH KNEES UPON THE MIDDLE OF OUR JAILER’S
  BACK.”                                 _Frontispiece._

  (See page 208.)]




  THE TREASURE OF
  MUSHROOM ROCK

  A STORY OF PROSPECTING IN THE
  ROCKY MOUNTAINS

  BY
  SIDFORD F. HAMP

  ILLUSTRATED

  G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
  NEW YORK AND LONDON
  The Knickerbocker Press
  1899




  COPYRIGHT, 1899
  BY
  SIDFORD F. HAMP

  Entered at Stationers’ Hall, London

  The Knickerbocker Press, New York




[Illustration]

CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                   PAGE

     I--MOSELEY’S                              1

    II--THE FLIGHT                            19

   III--A FALSE START                         40

    IV--THE MAN WITH THE SQUEAKY VOICE        60

     V--JACK; AND WHAT HE HAD TO SAY          77

    VI--TWO OLD ACQUAINTANCES                 96

   VII--INTO THE WILDERNESS                  113

  VIII--A QUEER COUNTRY                      131

    IX--SQUEAKY SCORES ONE                   151

     X--THE VALLEY OF THE MUSHROOM ROCK      174

    XI--A COUNTER-STROKE                     194

   XII--A GOOD RIDDANCE                      211

  XIII--THE CLEANING OF THE POT-HOLES        230

   XIV--HIGH TIME TO LEAVE                   248

    XV--A WAY OUT                            274

   XVI--ALL ACCOUNTS SQUARED                 294




[Illustration]

ILLUSTRATIONS


  PAGE

  “LANDED WITH BOTH KNEES UPON THE MIDDLE OF OUR
      JAILER’S BACK”                                  _Frontispiece_

  “I WAVED THE LIGHT TO AND FRO IN FRONT OF ME”                   70

  “HE LOOKED DOWN UPON THE TWO UNSUSPECTING CAMPERS”             107

  “DROP THAT!”                                                   164

  “OUT CAME A LITTLE PATCH OF YELLOW GOLD.”                      247

  “IT WAS WITH A FEELING OF AWE THAT WE GATHERED
      AROUND THE DEAD MAN”                                       312




[Illustration]

THE TREASURE OF MUSHROOM ROCK




CHAPTER I

MOSELEY’S


One windy night in April, some five-and-twenty years ago, the young
moon, peeping now and then between the scudding wisps of cloud, seemed
to be maintaining a careful watch upon a little incident which was
taking place outside the windows of Moseley’s school--a large brick
building standing in a walled enclosure.

Save for the roaring of the wind in the elm-trees, no sound was to
be heard until, presently, the clock in the old church-tower struck
eleven. As if the striking of the hour had been a signal, a boy
suddenly appeared, stepping softly from the shadow of the enclosure
wall. Picking up a small pebble, he cast it up at one of the windows.
The window opened immediately and a second boy appeared. The one below
gave two clicks with his tongue; whereupon the boy above let fall from
the window a white bundle, which, instead of dropping upon the ground,
unfolded itself and hung suspended. In the half-darkness the object
looked very like two sheets knotted together to form a rope. That it
was indeed intended to serve as a rope became at once evident, for
the second boy, getting astride of the window-ledge, seized the sheet
with one hand, and letting go his hold of the ledge came squirming and
twisting down to the ground.

Having paused for an instant to listen, the two boys tiptoed away and
were presently lost in the shadow. A moment later they reappeared on
the top of the wall, dropped upon the outer side, stood still again for
an instant to listen and peer about, and then, seemingly satisfied that
there was nobody moving, they turned their faces southward and went
running, _pit-pat_, down the white chalk road until they vanished among
the trees at the bottom of the hill.

How it came about that Percy Goodall, an American boy, and I, Tom
Swayne, an English boy, were running away together that windy night in
April from Moseley’s school in the south of England, what led to our
flight, and what came of it, form the subjects of the tale I have set
out to chronicle; having been urged to undertake the task by Percy’s
father and mine, and by our kind old friend, Sir Anthony Ringwood.

Percy’s father was the American Consul at one of the large seaport
towns on the English Channel. His duties, of course, obliged him to
live on the spot, but thinking that a smoky town, swarming with rough
sailors of all nations and with many undesirable characters, was not
the best place for a boy, he cast about for a good school to which he
might send his son. After many and careful inquiries he settled upon
Moseley’s, and accordingly, at the end of one Christmas holidays, Percy
being then fourteen years old, his father took him up there and left
him, a forlorn little scrap of humanity, alone in a land of strangers.

He was not alone for long, however, nor did he long continue to feel
like a stranger, for on the following day we boys all came trooping
back to school. There were about sixty of us, varying in ages from
nine to nineteen. Most of us boarded in the houses of the different
masters, but a few were day-boys, whose homes were in the village. Of
these, I, Tom Swayne, the vicar’s son, was one.

As soon as it was discovered that there was a new boy, and that boy an
American, Percy became a centre of attraction to the whole school. None
of us had ever seen an American before, and we therefore inspected the
newcomer with great interest. We found a sturdy, active, bright-eyed
youngster, who, instead of being arrayed, as we had half expected, in
striped trousers, a star-spangled coat, and a “chimney-pot” hat with
the fur all turned the wrong way, was clothed like any of ourselves.
In fact, except for the mispronunciation--as it seemed to us--of a few
words, we could not see wherein an American differed from anybody else.

Percy and I very soon became friends. We had our desks next to each
other in school, and we were put into the same class, occupying at
first the two bottom places; an arrangement, however, which did not
last very long, for Percy, as soon as he “got the hang of things,” to
use his own expression, began to move up in the class, leaving me to
occupy my accustomed place at the bottom by myself. He was quick at
learning Latin and Greek; whereas I never could do anything in the
classical languages--and unfortunately for me Latin and Greek formed
the backbone of our studies at Moseley’s.

But though in the matter of scholarship there was a good deal of
difference between Percy and me, that fact did not prevent us from
becoming the best of friends; for in most other respects there were
many points of resemblance between us. We were both fond of all
kinds of athletic exercise, and both were good at any game requiring
strength and agility. Many a time did the spirit of adventure get us
into scrapes with Sir Anthony Ringwood’s keepers; many an exploring
expedition did we make together, far out upon Salisbury Plain in one
direction, and down to the New Forest in the other; and, to be honest,
I fear I must admit that when any particularly ingenious piece of
mischief was reported to old Moseley, the Head-master, it was pretty
sure to have been Percy who had thought of it, and the pair of us who
had taken the lead in carrying it out.

Of all the attractive places in the neighbourhood, however, the one
to which we most resorted was Hengist’s Castle, a handsome old ruin
standing on a small elevation about a mile from Moseley’s; and there is
one incident connected with our explorations of this ancient edifice
which is so closely associated with our subsequent adventures that I
must not pass it over in silence.

My father and mother took a great liking for my American chum--they
admired his brightness and his transparent honesty--and both of them,
my mother especially, to make him feel that though a stranger in the
land he was not exactly a foreigner, as a French boy would have been,
made him welcome to the vicarage whenever he chose to come, and as we
were always together, that was pretty often. On one of these occasions,
a wet Saturday afternoon, Percy, poking about among the neglected
volumes on the top shelves of the library, came upon a musty old
leather-bound history of Hengist’s Castle. Among the many anecdotes
scattered through this book there was one in particular which attracted
his attention. It told how, “once upon a time,” a certain Sir Gregory
Powlett had taken refuge in the castle; how he was at supper in the
dining-hall one evening, when there came a clank of mailed feet and
a thundering at the door, and the soldiers of that vengeful tyrant,
Richard III., had burst upon the scene; and how Sir Gregory had but
time to fly to the fireplace, whence, though there was a fire burning
at the time, he had succeeded in gaining the secret passage.

This story set Percy thinking. If there had been a secret passage
in the days of Richard III., why should it not be there yet? He
communicated his idea to me, and we determined to set about a
systematic search for it. From the diagrams and pictures with which the
history was embellished we made out the situation of the dining-hall
and the fireplace, and one half-holiday, without a word of our
intention to anybody, we commenced our exploration.

Of the original walls of the dining-hall there was but one left
standing; the others had been knocked to pieces by Cromwell’s men. This
wall abutted against the ancient Keep, a square tower of considerable
altitude, and was itself some seven feet thick and thirty feet high;
covered, in many places to the top, with a heavy mat of ivy. In the
thickness of the wall the chimney was built, a shaft five feet square
at the bottom, but diminishing in size a short distance from the
ground to one half those dimensions.

Standing in the fireplace, Percy and I peered about for an opening
somewhere, but could see none. There was no stone panel working on a
hinge, which was what we had rather expected to find, nor anything in
the nature of steps by which we might climb the chimney. Overhead all
was dark, for the shaft, besides contracting suddenly, had in it a bend
which prevented us from seeing out at the top.

“I’ll tell you what,” said Percy: “we must get upon the top of the wall
somehow and look down. I expect we can climb up by the ivy.”

The ivy outside was probably older than that inside the hall; at any
rate it was thicker and reached higher. We therefore went outside,
and choosing a spot where the mass of leaves was at least three feet
in thickness and the stem of the plant about six inches in diameter,
we went scrambling to the top and then made our way along the uneven
surface of the broken wall until we came to the hole we were seeking,
which we found to be level with the top of the wall and half concealed
by the ivy.

Apparently we were no better off than before, however. We could see
nothing, and we were afraid to attempt the descent of the inside of the
chimney, for a fall to the bottom would pretty certainly result in some
broken bones, to say nothing of a broken neck.

“Look here, Percy,” said I, “let us go back to the vicarage and bring
up a rope--there is one in the gardener’s tool-house, I know--and then
we will fasten it to something and climb down the chimney.”

This suggestion met with Percy’s approval; and in half an hour we were
back again, rope in hand.

“Do you think you can hold it, Tom, while I go down?” asked Percy.

“I don’t know,” I replied. “The rope is rather small, and it might slip
through my hands. If we can take a turn with it round something I could
hold it then.”

After a short search we found, some distance below the top of the wall,
a dressed stone imbedded in the masonry and projecting about eighteen
inches into the dining-hall. What it was there for we did not know, nor
did we care, so long as it would serve our purpose. After one or two
casts I succeeded in looping the rope under the stone, when, firmly
holding one end, I sat down on the edge of the chimney With my feet
braced against the other side and gave the word to Percy to descend.

Having the rope to hold by, Percy found no difficulty in scrambling
down the dark hole until his feet came against the uppermost of three
little ledges built in the sloping wall of the chimney. Securing a firm
foothold, he took from his pocket a fragment of candle, lighted it,
and commenced spying up and down for an opening. None was to be seen;
three of the walls, at any rate, were solid. He turned round on the
ledge. There, close against his face, was a dark passage about two feet
square, so cleverly placed in the overhanging wall as to be invisible
either from above or below.

“Tom!” My name came booming up the chimney.

“Hallo!” I shouted in reply.

“I’ve found it!”

“Found what? The passage?”

“Yes. Right here. Can you see the candle?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Well, it is right in front of me; but it is as dark as pitch inside.
Wait a moment; I will reach in as far as I can and see if I can see
anything.”

He did so; and immediately, fluff!--out went the candle, and I heard
him exclaim, “Hi! B-rrr! Get out!”

“What is it?” I shouted.

“Bats. A dozen of them. They flew right into my face.”

“I say, Percy,” I called down to him, “can you stand without the rope?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Well, then, let go. I’m going to tie the two ends together and come
down too.”

This was soon done, and down I went, my knees braced against one side
of the chimney and my shoulders against the other. Standing upon the
top ledge, while Percy stood upon the lowest one, I lit my candle--for
we had “annexed” a couple of candle-ends when we went down for the rope.

“That’s the passage, all right,” said I. “But how did that old buffer
in the history-book ever get up to it? Ah, I see. Look here--come up a
step. Do you see this big iron staple with three rusty links of chain
attached to it? The chain must have hung down into the fireplace once,
so that an active fellow might pull himself up by it and draw it up
after him. But I suppose the rain, running down the chimney for two
hundred years, has rusted it all away. These links look pretty rotten
themselves.”

They were, indeed, pretty rotten; for, as I spoke, I picked up one of
them and broke it to pieces with my finger and thumb quite easily. The
staple itself, however, being thicker, and being placed farther inside
the passage, was still perfectly sound.

“Come on,” said Percy. “Let us crawl down the passage and see where it
leads to.”

After crawling for a short distance we found that the roof of the
passage rose sufficiently to enable us to stand upright, and directly
afterwards we came upon a flight of stone stairs ascending into the
darkness. Up these we went, ten steps, emerging presently through a
square hole into a little room, in which were a small fireplace and a
window, the latter covered with ivy. Looking through this window we
could see the school and the village, and we guessed at once that the
room was built in the wall of the Keep, which we knew to be immensely
thick.

As may be supposed, we were highly jubilant over our discovery.
We decided at once that we would keep our secret to ourselves, if
possible; that the room should be our own private den, to which
nobody, on any pretence whatever, should be admitted.

The first thing to be done was to provide some ready means of access to
the passage, and this we accomplished before the day was out.

Procuring from the village blacksmith a stout iron bar, we laid it
across one corner of the chimney-top in receptacles made for the
purpose by prying up some of the stones, and having reset the stones as
well as we could, the first part of our task was completed. The next
thing was to attach to the bar one half of the rope, which I had begged
from my father, and after tying a short, stout piece of wood every two
feet of its length, to drop it down the chimney. The other half of the
rope we tied in like manner to the big staple in the entrance of the
passage, and as it reached to within seven feet of the hearthstone we
were able to go up or down as we liked. There was little chance that
anybody would discover the end of the rope in the chimney, for, though
the boys were in the habit of playing hide-and-seek about the castle,
they were all aware that there was nowhere to hide in the fireplace,
while the occasional tourist was unlikely to go in there at all.

As our den contained a fireplace of its own, and as the weather
was chilly, for it was just after the Christmas holidays,--Percy’s
second Christmas at the school,--it naturally occurred to us that
we ought to have a supply of fire-wood. But fire-wood is a scarce
article in England, and we were obliged to search the hedge-rows and
spinneys for a long distance around for dead sticks ere we could
collect a sufficient supply. With infinite labour we succeeded in
getting together about a cart-load, which we hoisted in small bundles
up the chimney and carried to the den; and then, of course, we must
straightway light a fire to test the drawing qualities of our fireplace.

We had been standing by the fire, warming ourselves, for a quarter
of an hour, or so, when Percy, happening to look out of the window,
exclaimed:

“Why! What is the matter down in the village? The whole population
seems to be coming up here.”

“It’s the smoke!” I cried. “It’s the smoke pouring out of the top of
the Keep. They are coming up to see what is the cause of it. We must
hurry out and pull up our ropes; they might find them.”

Back we went in great haste; detached the ropes and pulled them up;
drew the ivy over the iron bar, and scrambled down the wall. Then,
Percy taking one of the ropes and I the other, we wound them round
and round our bodies and buttoned our coats over them. They made us
look absurdly fat, but that could not be helped. Then we ran round the
bottom of the hill and joined the procession of villagers from behind.

It was not surprising that their attention had been attracted. We had
built a roaring fire in the hope of taking the chill out of the walls
of the den, and some of the wood being rather damp, an immense volume
of smoke was rolling away from the summit of the old tower.

The men and boys, including Percy and myself, at once dispersed all
over the castle in search of the fire; every spot, likely or unlikely,
was inspected, without result, and presently everybody congregated
again at the base of the Keep, whence the mysterious smoke was still
pouring in clouds, to discuss the meaning of this wonderful phenomenon.
Percy and I were in perfect ecstasies of delight as we listened to the
varied opinions of the astonished villagers; it was with the greatest
difficulty we could restrain our laughter.

“Do’ee know what ’tis makes thicky smo-ak?” said one old fellow in a
smock-frock. “’Tis my opinion it be gho-asts.”

“Or witches,” added another, turning pale at his own idea.

Everybody shook his head and looked serious; for the farm-labourer
of the south of England firmly believed in witches at that time--and
probably he does so still, for he is of a slow-moving race.

One man, however, a big young fellow in a velveteen coat, scouted the
idea. He was one of Sir Anthony Ringwood’s keepers.

“Witches and ghosts!” he exclaimed, scornfully. “’Tain’t neither one
nor t’other; ’tis poachers, that’s what ’tis. They’ve bin and found
some room in the castle as nobody knows on, and ’tis them as is making
this’ere smoke.”

But this very reasonable idea of our friend in velveteen was received
with equal scorn by the others. They preferred the witch theory. I
have no doubt but that every single one of them took care to stop up
his keyhole that night, in case one of the witches, offended at this
officious prying into her affairs, should think fit to pay him a visit.

Having concluded their fruitless search, the party returned to their
homes; while Percy and I, readjusting the ropes, went back to the
den, where we spent the rest of the afternoon sitting by the fire and
chuckling over the mystification of the villagers.

But though the villagers had no trouble in deciding that the
supernatural smoke was due to the agency of witchcraft, Sir Anthony
was by no means so easily satisfied. The old Baronet was the largest
landowner and chief magnate of the neighbourhood. He had been a
great sportsman in his day, having shot buffaloes on the plains of
America and tigers in the Indian jungles, and though he was now too
old for such enterprises, he was still as keen as ever with his gun,
and preserved the game upon his large estates with great strictness.
Poachers were the bane of his existence; and his declaration that he
would prosecute to the utmost extent of the law anyone found infringing
upon his game-rights was well known to us and to everybody else in the
village.

The poachers happened to be particularly active at this time, and
the young keeper’s theory that some of that troublesome fraternity
had discovered a secret chamber in the castle found favour with the
better-educated people of the neighbourhood; Sir Anthony in particular
was convinced of its correctness. In consequence, he ordered a strict
examination of the old ruin to be made under the direction of the
head-keeper, a very intelligent man; but Percy and I, getting wind
of his intention, removed the telltale ropes, and as the ivy was not
strong enough to bear the weight of a grown man, none of the keepers
could get upon the top of the wall, and our secret therefore remained a
secret, its value being only enhanced by the wonder which the mystery
excited in the whole community.


[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER II

THE FLIGHT


Some six months previous to our discovery of the secret chamber, it
happened that all the boys in our class at school had been taken with
a desire to become archers,--the result of reading the story of Robin
Hood,--and Percy and I, among the rest, had procured bows and arrows,
and had spent many hours practising at a sack full of straw suspended
from a bough in the playground. With the others the craze, as such
crazes will, had died out again in a short time; we two alone kept it
up. For one thing, my chum’s persevering nature impelled him, having
undertaken to be an archer, to be one; another reason was that our bows
were very superior to those of the other boys. In the churchyard there
grew a splendid old yew-tree, the pride of the village, and we, young
rascals that we were, had purloined from it two straight branches,
which, with great pains, we had fashioned into very serviceable bows.
By constant practice we became highly respectable shots, and many a
luckless small bird did we thoughtlessly slay for the mere pleasure of
killing; we even became so expert as now and then to kill a rabbit “on
the wing,” as Percy put it.

The favourite place for our shooting expeditions was the Cross-roads
Spinney, a triangular piece of ground of eight or nine acres, well
covered with trees, which lay about two miles from the village. It
belonged to nobody, or rather, being claimed by Sir Anthony and by the
Parish, it had for many years lain in Chancery; a state of affairs
which suited us very well, for, while the lawsuit dragged along, we
boys appropriated the place for our own happy hunting-ground. Bordering
as it did upon Sir Anthony’s best game-preserve, it was a source of
great annoyance to the old Baronet that the title could not be settled,
for many a pheasant flew over the wall to roost in the spinney, and
very seldom did it ever fly back again; somebody was sure to get it.
Then, too, the gypsies would frequently encamp there, to Sir Anthony’s
great disgust; for, with him and his keepers, “gypsy” and “poacher”
were synonymous terms.

This spinney was not far from Hengist’s Castle, and the belief that the
poachers who were just now giving so much trouble were harbouring in
the ruins, kept all the keepers on the alert, not only in the hope of
laying hands on the culprits, but of discovering their hiding-place.

One evening in April, Percy and I were returning from a shooting
expedition, bearing our spoils, one rabbit each, in our hands, when
we were overtaken by one of our school-fellows,--Bates, senior, by
name,--with whom, though there were no active hostilities between us,
we had long been “at outs.” We did not like him, and he returned the
compliment.

That I may not do him an injustice, I must explain that Bates had some
reason for his antipathy. He was an orphan, his affairs being managed
by a crusty old lawyer in London, whose idea of the proper discharge of
the duties of a guardian was confined to the remitting of so much money
to his ward every three months--more money than a boy ought to have at
command--and in taking no further notice of him until next quarter-day
came round. Bates was thus in a manner thrown upon the world to follow
his own bent, and, unfortunately for him, his bent had one very
serious twist in it,--he was a born gambler.

Old Moseley was aware of his pupil’s proclivities. He had found him
out once in a horse-racing transaction whereby Bates had lost a
considerable sum of money, and had warned him that at the next offence
he would have to leave the school; a warning which seemed to have had
the desired effect, for during some months thereafter Bates desisted.

One day, however, Percy and I, ranging the woods in search of
birds’-nests, came suddenly upon Bates and a stranger seated on the
ground with a handkerchief spread between them, shaking dice for
shillings. The disconcerted gambler, when he saw he was discovered,
sprang to his feet and advanced upon us with a threatening air, but,
though he was three years older and three inches taller than either of
us, Percy and I were not afraid of him, and Bates, knowing, probably,
that we were a pair hard to beat,--which I think I may assert without
risking the charge of bragging,--thought better of it, and, changing
his manner, invited us to join the game--an invitation we promptly
declined. He then fell to begging us to say nothing about it. This we
promised--with a reservation.

“Look here, Bates,” said Percy, who was usually the spokesman for the
pair; “of course we won’t say anything about it. Why should we? But
if old Moseley asks us any questions we are not going to tell him any
lies.”

I nodded my head in approval. Bates, who seemed to regard such scruples
as absurd, tried in vain to argue us out of this resolution, and was
obliged finally to content himself with the assurance we had given him.

To have been defied by two boys younger than himself was bad enough; to
be at the mercy of their possibly indiscreet tongues was worse. From
that time forth, fearing that the incident might come to light, Bates,
all unsuspected by us, set his wits to work to oust us from the school,
if possible, and by a curious, roundabout course he succeeded at last,
though in a manner he could hardly have expected, and with results he
was very far from anticipating.

Since the occurrence of the dice-shaking incident Percy and I had held
no intercourse with him, and we were therefore somewhat surprised and
quite well please when Bates, overtaking us that evening, checked his
pace and spoke to us.

“I say, you fellows,” said he; “don’t you think it is about time we
made friends again?”

It occurred to me that this way of putting it was hardly correct, as we
had never been friends before; but Percy did not notice it, and putting
out his hand, he said, “All right, Bates; I’m willing if you are.”

Percy was of that straightforward, unsuspicious nature that it never
entered his mind that Bates could have ulterior motive for his friendly
advances; while, as for myself, I was accustomed to follow my chum’s
lead without much consideration for the consequences. Accordingly we
shook hands all round and walked on side by side, glad to think that
the feud was ended.

“You haven’t been to the spinney to-day, have you?” asked Bates.

“No,” replied Percy. “We went up the Roman road to Crabtree’s farm.
There are lots of rabbits there, and old Crabtree is glad to have them
shot; they are so think as to be just a nuisance.”

“Well,” said Bates, “I’ve just come by the spinney, and I saw something
that made me think of you two fellows and your bows and arrows. I had
an idea; and you can help me to carry it out if you like. In fact, to
be honest, that was why I proposed to you to be friends again.”

We were rather pleased at this “honest” confession. Bates was not such
a bad fellow after all, perhaps.

“What is your idea?” asked Percy.

“I’ll tell you. As I was coming along I saw five pheasants fly over
Sir Anthony’s park-wall and alight in the spinney. I crept in there,
and there they were, all settling themselves for the night in a young
fir-tree. Then I thought of you. What do you say to going out to-night
and having a try for them? You can bring your bows and arrows, and I’ll
show you the place. What do you say?”

“But, look here, Bates,” said I. “Isn’t it against the law to shoot
pheasants?”

“Oh, no,” said Bates confidently. “If you were to shoot them on Sir
Anthony’s land, that would be poaching, of course; but in the spinney a
pheasant belongs to anybody who can get it.”

“Are you sure?” asked Percy.

“Certain, quite certain,” Bates declared with much emphasis. “You would
not catch me going after pheasants if there was any fear of getting
into prison for it. No, thank you. You may be sure of that.”

“It does seem pretty reasonable,” said Percy, “that game found on land
that belongs to nobody in particular should be the property of anyone
who can get it; and if you’re sure you’re right, Bates, I think we may
as well go. Eh, Tom?”

Percy, naturally enough, knew almost nothing of the English game-laws,
and, as for myself, I knew but little more. I was aware that rabbits
were not game--in the eye of the law--and that pheasants were, but
whether it were an illegal act to kill a pheasant in a public place
like the spinney I had no knowledge. But as Bates was not afraid to
venture (and we had no great opinion of his courage); as we were both
very desirous of shooting a pheasant; and as, in fine, we possessed
that common attribute of schoolboys, the habit of acting first and
thinking afterwards, we decided to go.

At eight o’clock that evening, therefore, Bates, carrying a bag for the
reception of the game, called for us at the vicarage, where Percy and I
were waiting for him, and together we set off for our hunting-ground by
a short cut across the fields.

We had nearly reached our destination, when Bates, vaulting over the
gate which led from one field to another, managed somehow to entangle
his feet in the game-bag and fell upon his hands and knees on the
farther side, at the same time uttering a sharp exclamation of pain.

“Have you hurt yourself?” asked Percy, solicitously, seeing that our
guide remained sitting on the ground clasping one ankle with both hands.

“I’m afraid I’ve twisted my ankle a little,” replied Bates, suppressing
a groan with seeming difficulty.

“Well, that is hard luck,” said Percy. “That ends our expedition for
to-night, sure enough. Look here, Bates. Put one arm over Swayne’s
shoulders and the other over mine and we’ll help you along back to the
schoolhouse as fast as we can. If you can’t do it in that way, we’ll
carry you pick-a-back in turns. I expect we can manage it if we rest
often enough.”

“Oh, no,” returned Bates. “We won’t give up our expedition yet, now
that we have come this far. I am afraid I had better not try to walk
any farther myself, but you two can go on and get the pheasants. You
won’t be gone more than half an hour, I suppose, and then you can come
back to me and give me a hand home. I’ll just sit here and wait for
you.”

At first we were very much opposed to this course, but Bates insisting,
we at length agreed to go on, and accordingly, taking with us the
game-bag, and leaving him propped up with his back against the gate, we
hurried off.

We soon spotted the young fir-tree, the position of which Bates had
carefully described to us, and there, sure enough, were the pheasants;
we could see them, like dark blotches, against the sky.

“You take the first shot,” whispered Percy.

Choosing the lowest bird, that its fall might not disturb the others,
I let fly, and down it came with hardly a flutter. Percy then took a
shot, with equal success. We placed the two birds at the foot of the
tree, and were stooping to pull out the arrows, when we were suddenly
pounced upon from behind, and a voice in my ear, a voice strangely
familiar, said:

“These are your poachers, Keeper, caught in the act. Sir Anthony will
give you a five-pound note for this, you may depend.”

“Thanks to you, sir,” said the keeper, who was holding Percy by the
collar. “Bring the young gent along; they’ll spend the rest of the
night in the lock-up.”

My assailant transferred his grip to my collar, and I was then able to
turn my head and look at him. It was Bates.

“What are you up to, Bates?” I exclaimed, giving him a dig in the
stomach with my elbow. “What do you mean by calling us poachers? You
know perfectly well we are not poaching.”

“Oh, yes, you are, though,” replied Bates, with a complacent snigger.
“Are they not, Keeper?”

“Yes, sir,” replied the keeper--it was the big young man who had helped
the villagers in the search for our fire in the castle. “They’re
poaching, sure enough. ’Tain’t the first time, neither, I’ll lay a
tanner.”

“What rot you are talking, Keeper!” I blurted out. “You know just as
well as I do that this isn’t Sir Anthony’s land.”

“Ah, but it is, though,” replied the grinning keeper; and Bates burst
out laughing.

“Perhaps you didn’t know,” said he, “that the Chancery suit was settled
three days ago in favour of Sir Anthony. This spinney is part of his
preserves now; and you are caught poaching, my fine fellows. You’ll
never see your native land again, my little Yankee,” shaking his fist
at Percy. “If you’re not hung you’ll be transported for life. Oh, this
is fine! I think I’ve squared accounts with the pair of you now, you
young beggars.”

Then the whole extent of Bates’ villainy burst upon us. He had known
of the settlement of the lawsuit, and he had pretended to make friends
with us that evening solely with the object of drawing us into this
trap. His twisted ankle was merely a part of the trick, contrived
beforehand.

I was so enraged at his unparalleled meanness that I squirmed around in
his grasp, and seizing him by the arms, I set to work kicking his shins
with enthusiastic vigour. This was more than Bates had bargained for.
He hopped about, first on one leg and then on the other, struggling to
break from my grasp, and yelling to the keeper to come and help him.
But the keeper was fully occupied in holding Percy; so Bates and I had
it out between us. I hope I am not of a very vindictive nature, but I
confess I long remembered with satisfaction the sound made by my stout
English shoes as they cracked against the shins of the howling Bates.

At length he broke away and fled; when I instantly ran to the
assistance of Percy. Coming up behind the keeper I seized him by the
hair, pulling his head back so that his face was turned up to the sky.
Down he came to his knees, and leaving his hold of Percy he attempted
to grasp me by the wrist. This, however, was just what I was expecting,
and giving him a sharp push I threw him forward upon his face.

The next moment Percy and I were out of the wood and scudding down the
road.

The indignant keeper was up and after us like a shot; we could hear his
heavy shoes coming, _clip-clop_, on the hard road behind us. We were
just beginning to think we should out-run him when he blew a shrill
whistle, in response to which two other keepers suddenly appeared
in the road a hundred yards ahead. They supposed they had caught us
then; but they were mistaken. Without an instant’s hesitation Percy
swerved to one side, put down his head, shut his eyes, and dashed at
the quickset hedge which bordered the road. He burst half-way through,
when a push from me sent him forward upon his hands and knees on the
other side. I dived into the gap he had made, and Percy, seizing me by
the arm, dragged me through, just as the young keeper came panting up
behind.

Away we went across country, heading straight for the castle, and after
a smart run of nearly a mile we dashed into the old dining-hall--still
fifty yards ahead of our pursuers. Calling to Percy to take to the
chimney, I bolted through the arched doorway of the hall and scrambled
up the ivy, reaching the top in time to see the young keeper pop into
the fireplace down below. He had evidently seen Percy go in there,
and supposed he had caught him as in a trap. Great was his surprise,
therefore, to find the place empty.

Soon Bates and the other two men came up, and as I lay on the top of
the wall, peeping over, I could hear their conversation.

“Gone up the chimney, have they?” said Bates. “Then they can’t escape:
they will have to come down again sometime. I’ll tell you what it is,
men: these are the poachers who have been making this smoke that has
been puzzling everybody so much; they have found some secret chamber up
the chimney here. I wonder what Sir Anthony will say when he hears who
it is that has been stealing his pheasants so long.”

“He’ll prosecute ’em, sir; you may depend on it,” said one of the
keepers. “He told me, only this morning, he didn’t care who it was,
he’d prosecute ’em to the full extent of the law.”

“I hope he will; they deserve it--the young rascals. Look here, men----”

Bates and the three keepers fell to whispering together; I could no
longer hear what was said. Presently they withdrew to either side of
the fireplace and stood motionless, except that Bates occasionally
rubbed his shins. It was plain that they expected that, if they kept
quiet, we, supposing they had gone, would come down to be pounced upon.

I put my face over the opening of the chimney and gave a click with my
tongue; Percy answered the signal; and then I whispered to him to come
up. Soon his head appeared, and creeping out of the hole he pulled up
the rope and laid it on the wall.

“Did you pull up the other rope?” I asked.

“Part way. I lodged it on one of the ledges below the passage. What are
they doing down there?”

“Waiting for us to come down.”

We peered over the wall. Seemingly the enemy had already tired of
waiting, for they were holding another whispered consultation, which
resulted in the disappearance of two of the keepers into the fireplace.
Presently we heard a muffled voice exclaim:

“There’s a rope up here. Give me your stick, Andrew, and I’ll hook it
down.”

Bates and the remaining keeper immediately crowded into the fireplace,
and we, listening down the chimney, heard a scrabbling and a scuffing,
and then a light appeared, and the same voice said:

“Here’s a passage. Here’s three candles and a half, and candle-grease
all along. That’s where they’ve gone. I’m a-going to crawl in there.”

“Hold up a bit, Jim,” the young keeper called out; “I’m coming too.”

“So will I,” cried the other, whose curiosity was excited by the
discovery of a passage; and, “So will I,” cried Bates, who did not
choose to be left alone in the shadowy old ruin.

There was a great deal of scuffing and scraping, and we two, lying flat
on the wall with one eye each over the edge of the orifice, saw four
pairs of heels alternately kick and struggle and finally disappear down
the passage.

“Come on, Percy,” I exclaimed. “Let us get down the wall while we can.”

“Wait a bit,” he replied. “There’s something else to be done first.”

To my surprise he let down the rope and vanished into the chimney
again. He was back in a minute, however, and pulling up the rope, he
sprang to his feet and cried:

“Now we’re all right. They won’t catch us to-night, I think.”

“What did you go down for?” I asked.

“I cut the other rope and dropped it into the fireplace.”

Instead of the enemy catching us, we had caught the enemy.

We were soon down upon the ground again, and on our homeward way, but
on rounding the corner of the Keep we espied a glimmer of light coming
through the ivy-leaves which covered the window of our private den.

“Let us hail them,” said Percy; and on my acquiescing he called out,
“Hallo, up there!”

Immediately the leaves parted, and a face, illuminated by a candle,
appeared. It was Bates. At his exclamation of surprise on seeing
us--for the moon was up--his face was at once surrounded by those of
the three keepers, who gazed in wonder at our unexpected appearance.

“Good-bye, Keepers,” cried Percy. “I’ve cut the rope in the chimney,
and you can’t get out. I’m sorry to inconvenience you, but I’m afraid
you are likely to starve to death. There’s plenty of fire-wood, and
there are three sparrows and a blackbird hanging on a nail in the
corner; they will keep you alive for a day or two; after that you can
cook Bates. Good-bye.”

With that we turned our backs upon the prisoners and set off at a brisk
trot for the vicarage.

There was a summer-house in one corner of the vicarage garden, and
to this we repaired in order that we might consult as to our future
proceedings.

“Do you believe that poaching is a hanging matter, Tom?” asked Percy.
“I remember my father telling me that there were once two hundred and
forty hanging offences in England, and this one might have been left
over when they repealed the others.”

“I believe it is not,” I replied. “But it is imprisonment, I’m sure.”

“What are we to do, then? We were caught poaching; there seems to be
no doubt about that. We didn’t intend it, of course, but I’m afraid
Sir Anthony may not take that into consideration; he appears to be so
hot against poachers. And for that matter, we may not have a chance to
tell our side of the story at all, because in England, I’ve heard, a
prisoner is not allowed to give evidence in his own defence. So, there
we are, you see. Four witnesses against us and none for us. Our chance
of imprisonment, it seems to me, is pretty good--or pretty bad, rather.”

Our case certainly did look serious when Percy thus laid it out for my
inspection.

“As far as I see,” said I, “there is nothing left but to run away. I
don’t _want_ to run away, you may be sure, but I don’t want to be hung
or transported or put in jail either. I wish my father and mother were
here, so that we might ask them what we ought to do.”

It happened that my parents had that evening driven off to dine and
sleep fifteen miles away, and Percy’s father being too far off for us
to communicate with him, we were thus deprived of our natural advisers.
It did not occur to either of us to lay the matter before old Moseley,
for the head-masters of English schools, at that time at least, seemed
to their younger pupils to stand upon too high and unapproachable an
eminence to be regarded by them as friends and counsellors.

“I’ll tell you what we must do,” said Percy, after sitting in profound
thought for the space of five minutes--“and considering that we got
into this scrape by no fault of our own, I believe our parents won’t
blame us for doing it. We’ll run off down to Southampton--we can get
there before morning--and slip on board a steamer going over to France.
From there I’ll write to my father and tell him all about it, and he
will arrange the matter somehow; or, if it is not to be arranged, he
will tell us what to do next. What do you say?”

“I think it is a first-rate idea, and I vote we do it.”

Doubtless we were a foolish pair of youngsters to decide upon such a
course, but I think, considering the circumstances, it is not so much
to be wondered at that we should run away and conceal ourselves for a
time until we should find out whether we were to be hanged, drawn, and
quartered, or otherwise made to suffer, for an offence we had never
intended to commit.

“But, Percy,” said I, as the thought occurred to me, “what about those
fellows up at the castle? We can’t leave them to starve to death.”

After some consideration Percy thought of a plan.

“See here,” said he. “You write out a statement of the whole matter and
leave it on your dressing-table. Say how Bates got us into this mess,
and where he is now. I’ll do the same. I’ll address it to old Moseley
and ask him to send it on to my father. How will that do?”

“That will do. And then your father, and mine too, will know that we
are all right, and that we haven’t run away without a pretty good
reason.”

“How much money have you?” asked Percy, as we rose from our conference.

“There are four pounds in my savings-box,” I replied.

“Well, bring it all,” said he. “I have three pounds, besides
twenty-five dollars my aunt gave me. Come and throw a stone at my
window at eleven and I’ll be ready. We must wait till everybody is
asleep.”

Percy then hurried off to the schoolhouse, and at five minutes past
eleven that night, as I have already told, we were running down the
white chalk road on our way to Southampton, twenty-five miles distant.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER III

A FALSE START


There was a tinge of red in the eastern sky when two very weary and
very hungry boys came tramping into Southampton and made their way down
to the docks. Among the innumerable vessels lying side by side they
presently came to one which presented an appearance of greater bustle
than the others; the steam was roaring from the funnels, cases and
boxes were being lowered into the hold amid much shouting and running
up and down of sailors, and everything betokened a speedy departure.

Of a man standing on the wharf, his hands in his pockets and a pipe in
the corner of his mouth, one of the boys inquired whither this vessel
was bound.

“D’n’-know,” grunted the man. “Dieppe, maybe, or St. Malo.”

“When does she sail?” asked the boy again.

“High tide; ’bout an hour.”

“Thank you,” said Percy, who had asked the questions; and then, turning
to me, he suggested that we had time to go and get some breakfast.

In a greasy little den by the waterside we managed to make a very
hearty meal, for we were too hungry to be particular, and in half
an hour we sallied forth again much refreshed. Somewhat to our
consternation, as we issued from the house we ran plump into the
arms of a big policeman, who eyed us, as we thought, with suspicious
keenness, but as he did not address us we walked back to the vessel, to
which a gang-plank had now been run out.

There did not appear to be many passengers going aboard, but among
them we noticed a large family, father and mother, three daughters,
and a son, awaiting their turn, and joining ourselves to this party we
walked on board with them, apparently without exciting any suspicion.
If any of the officers thought anything about it at all, they probably
supposed we were coming to see the rest of the family off.

We went at once down to the saloon, and walking up a long passage
toward the stern, tapped at the door of one of the state-rooms. There
was no answer, so, opening the door, we peeped in.

“This will do, Tom,” whispered my companion. “See; the beds are not
made up; this cabin is not taken.”

We slipped in, shut the door, and crawled beneath the berths on either
side. For the time, at any rate, we were safe.

During the long walk of the night before we had discussed a plan of
action, and had decided that, instead of paying for our passage before
starting, we would get on board and hide, if possible, in order to
avoid unpleasant explanations until it should be too late to send us
back; in which design we had succeeded more easily than we had ventured
to hope.

In about half an hour we heard a bell ring, somebody called out,
“Any more for the shore?” and not long afterwards, with a suddenness
which made us jump, there came, just under our heads apparently, a
_chug--chug--chug!_ and a splashing of water which notified us plainly
enough that we had started. Presently, from the slight motion of the
vessel, we guessed that we were clear of the docks and were steaming
down between the Isle of Wight and the mainland. This motion continued
for a long time, and then the boat suddenly heeled over and rolled back
with a creaking of timbers and a slamming of doors which proclaimed
the fact that we had rounded the Needles and were out in the English
Channel.

“Percy,” I whispered, “I wonder what they are doing at home now.
They’ve found your sheets hanging out of the window long before this.”

“Yes. And, Tom, I wonder if Bates has ventured to climb down the
chimney yet.”

“Not he,” I replied. “The keepers might, but Bates won’t.”

We lay silent again, and presently, worn out by our long night’s tramp,
and by the exertions and excitement of the day before, we fell asleep.
It was towards evening when the ringing of the dinner-bell woke us up.
Thinking it was the calling-bell at school, Percy started up and was at
once brought to a sense of his present situation by cracking the back
of his head sharply against the bottom of the berth. Seeing that I was
moving he whispered across to me:

“Tom, shall we go out now? We must be nearly across. How long does it
take to get over to France? Do you know?”

We had both crawled from our hiding-places, and were enjoying a hearty
stretch; I had opened my mouth to reply to Percy’s question, when we
heard footsteps in the passage, and a voice saying, “Number four. Lower
berth.”

“This is number four, Percy,” I whispered, hastily. “Shall we hide?”

“No,” said he, stoutly, and “All right,” said I; and standing side by
side we looked expectantly and with something of a tremor at the door.

The door opened, and a large man in a gold-laced hat put one foot
inside the cabin and stopped, regarding us with wide-opened eyes.
Behind him we saw a steward carrying an armful of bedding.

“Well, young gentlemen,” said the gold-laced man, whom we took to be
the Captain; “where did you spring from?”

“We came on board this morning, sir,” said Percy, “and we’ve been
asleep ever since.” Then, seeing that the man looked serious, he
hastily added, “We are ready to pay for our passage, sir.”

“And, if you please, sir,” I asked, “shall we be able to get something
to eat before we land?” For I was ravenously hungry.

At this the big man broke into a big laugh. “Well, yes,” said he. “You
will be more than hungry if you don’t. Where do you suppose you are
going to?”

“France,” we both answered together.

At this the big man’s countenance fell again. Telling the attending
Steward to leave the bedding, he shut the door, and said:

“Boys, I’m afraid you have made some grievous mistake. This boat is not
going to France. We are bound for New Orleans.”

It was our turn to look grave. Instead of a passage of six or eight
hours, we were in for a sea-voyage of two or three weeks. Added to
this, if we should give up all our money it would hardly suffice to pay
our way, and moreover we should on landing be stranded, penniless, in a
strange city in what was, to me at least, a foreign land. The situation
was decidedly serious.

“How did you ever come to make such a mistake?” our interlocutor went
on. “And why didn’t you take a ticket before coming on board? A pretty
mess you’ve made of it.”

“I’ll tell you the truth, sir,” replied Percy, with a glance at me
which I answered with a nod. “We ran away from school last night and
intended to go over to France for a time; but we were afraid to offer
to pay our passage beforehand lest you should refuse to take us; so we
slipped on board and hid in this cabin.”

“Well, well! You have certainly made a mess of it. I must go and tell
the Captain----”

“The Captain! We thought you were the Captain.”

“No; I’m the Purser. How much money have you, by the way?”

“Seven pounds, sir, and twenty-five dollars.”

“Hm! Sixty dollars. Not much more than enough to pay your passage by
steerage. And then you will be left paupers in New Orleans. Hm! I must
go and talk to the Captain.”

“If you please, sir,” said Percy, “can’t we earn our passage somehow?
We are both strong, and we’ll do anything.”

“I’ll see what can be done. Meanwhile you must have something to eat.
Come with me.”

The Purser led us to the Steward’s pantry, and there left us busily and
satisfactorily engaged in demolishing a dish of cold ham and a pile of
bread and butter.

“Percy,” said I, as soon as we were left to ourselves, “we’ve got into
a pretty hobble. How are we going to get out of it?”

“I don’t know how we are going to get out of it,” replied my companion.
“Unless we should meet another ship and the Captain should send us
back we shall have to go on to New Orleans. As far as we are concerned
I don’t care; it is thinking of the folks at home that bothers me. They
won’t know what has become of us, and there will be no means of letting
them know for three weeks, perhaps. If there was any way of getting
back I’d go back, and chance being hung, rather than let them worry
over us such a long time.”

“So would I,” was my response. “It would be quite a pleasure to meet a
policeman if he would guarantee to send a message home to say we were
all right.”

Though we were, perhaps, rather a harum-scarum pair of youngsters, we
were not altogether graceless. We were very sincerely troubled about
this matter. As it happened, however, our trouble was superfluous.
Though we were not made aware of the fact until long afterwards, it may
be well to say at once that our parents had already found out where
we were, and, knowing that we were well capable of taking care of
ourselves, so far from being overwhelmed with anxiety on our account,
they were almost disposed to chuckle over the predicament in which they
guessed we must be.

If only we could have known this, what a difference it would have made
to our comfort!

But two healthy boys cannot long remain in a doleful frame of mind,
and under the genial influence of the cold ham we presently began to
brighten up.

“That Purser is a jolly old buffer,” said I; “I only hope the Captain
is half as good a fellow. Suppose they let us work our passage, what
shall we do when we get to New Orleans?”

“I’ve been thinking about that,” replied Percy. “First of all, as
soon as ever we set foot on shore, we must telegraph home, if it
takes every cent we possess. Then, I propose that we take one of the
big river-steamers up to St. Louis,--working our passage, if they’ll
let us,--and from there turn eastward, ride as far as our money will
take us, and walk the rest of the way to Philadelphia. I have lots of
relations in Philadelphia, and they will help us. What do you think?”

I readily acquiesced in Percy’s plan; as, indeed, I should have done
in any other he might have proposed. It was not likely that I should
be able to contribute any valuable suggestions on the subject, for
my knowledge of American geography and American distances was quite
microscopic in its littleness. Of St. Louis I had never heard before,
while as to the other two cities, I knew that one was somewhere in the
South and the other somewhere in the East, and that was all. How far
apart they might be I had no idea.

It was well we settled upon a plan of action while we had the chance,
for, as it happened, we were destined to have few opportunities of
conversing during the rest of the voyage. One of the stewards presently
came in with a message from the Purser, to say that the Captain could
not see us until next day, and that he--the Steward--would find us a
bed. Accordingly, after going on deck in the forward part of the ship
to get a breath of fresh air for half an hour, we went to bed and slept
soundly until next morning.

Soon after breakfast, our friend (as we had come to regard him) the
Purser came and told us to follow him to the Captain’s cabin. It was
with a good deal of apprehension that we entered the sanctum of the
monarch of this little floating kingdom, but as there was nothing else
to be done we plucked up such courage as was left to us and stepped
over the threshold.

The Captain was a grey-haired, clean-shaven little man, with a keen
eye and a quick manner. He looked up as we came in.

“Oh, these are your stowaways, are they, Mr. Purser?” said he. “So you
have run away from school, have you, you young scamps? Do you know I
could put you in irons and take you back to Southampton if I chose? I’m
not sure but that I ought to do it. How am I to know that you are not
running away from the law?”

At this accidental shot Percy and I felt very uncomfortable, perceiving
which, and supposing that he had hurt our feelings, the Captain changed
his tone.

“Well, well,” said he, good-naturedly, “I don’t think that; your
appearance is in your favour; you look like an honest pair of
youngsters. So you want to work your passage, do you? Is either of you
any good at figures?”

“Yes, sir,” said I, brightening up in a moment, and pointing with my
thumb at Percy. “Goodall, here, is a regular nailer.”

“Oh, Goodall is a regular nailer, is he?” repeated the Captain,
relaxing into a smile. “Well, Mr. Purser, suppose you take this nailer
and set him to work in your office. Keep him tight at it; make him earn
his passage. And you, you great hobbledehoy,”--to me,--“what can you
do? Your hands are more use to you than your head, I’ll wager.”

I suppose my wits were somewhat confused by this sudden address; at any
rate, after a moment’s consideration, I commenced the enumeration of my
capabilities by saying thoughtfully:

“Well, sir, I’m a pretty good shot with a bow and arrow”--at which
absurd reply both the Captain and the Purser burst into peals of
laughter.

“How old are you, boy?” asked the former as soon as he had recovered
his powers of speech.

“Sixteen, sir.”

“Sixteen! I thought you were eighteen. Are you willing to shovel coal
for a living for the next two weeks?”

“Yes, sir,” said I, eagerly.

“Very well, then. The Chief Engineer tells me, Mr. Purser, that one of
his firemen is laid up with a sprained wrist; so find this boy a suit
of overalls if you can and turn him loose in the boiler-room. It is a
good hot job, and it will take off some of his flesh; he’s a deal too
fat. Now, get along with you, you young scamps, and mind you behave
yourselves.”

“Well, boys,” said the Purser, after we had retired, “you have come
out of that scrape pretty well.”

“Thanks to you, sir, I expect,” said Percy.

“I put in a good word for you, I admit,” replied our big friend. “I was
pleased with the way you spoke up last night. Now I must see to putting
you to work. Come along.”

As a result of the Purser’s arrangements Percy and I were separated;
he being pretty closely confined by his duties in the Purser’s office,
while I, dressed up in a canvas suit, was sent down into the black
depths of the ship, to shovel coal.

It would be needless repetition to go into all the details of our
voyage, every day being but a counterpart of the day before. It is
enough to say that when, after a smooth and uneventful passage, the
engines at last stopped, and I was at liberty to go on deck, I found
myself looking out over a great city,--the metropolis of the Southern
States.

Before we went ashore I was told that the Captain had sent for me to
his cabin, and as soon as I had washed and changed my canvas suit for
my own clothes I hastened to obey the message. I was about to knock at
the door when I saw Percy coming towards me, and guessing that he had
received a similar command I waited for him.

As I stood there close by the door I heard the Captain’s voice
addressing someone inside. He seemed to be much amused by something his
companion had just been telling him, for he was laughing heartily.

“Capital idea!” he exclaimed. “It will do them all the good in the
world. You may report from me that they have behaved very well, and
that in my opinion they are quite capable of taking care of themselves.”

At this moment Percy joined me, when we at once knocked at the door and
stepped into the cabin. The individual to whom the Captain had been
talking, a small, sharp-faced man in a check suit, rose as we entered,
and taking no notice of us apparently, thanked the Captain for his
information and went out.

“Well, boys,” said the Captain, “I sent for you to tell you that
I have had a satisfactory report of both of you, and to give you
this”--handing us ten dollars each; “I’m told you have earned it.
Now let me give you something else--a piece of advice. Telegraph to
your friends for the money and turn right round and go home again.
Good-bye.”

“Good-bye, sir; and thank you,” said Percy and I together, glad to be
thus dismissed without the cross-questioning to which we had feared
we might be subjected. Having then taken leave of our good friend the
Purser, we straightway went ashore.

Pausing only for a few minutes to look down upon the city, and to
wonder how the inhabitants ever dared to go to bed with that tremendous
river only awaiting an opportunity, apparently, to rush in and drown
them all before morning, we set off in search of a telegraph-office,
whence we sent a brief message home, and having also mailed a long
letter which Percy had written during the passage out, we retraced our
steps to the river-side.

As we left the post-office we noticed the sharp-faced man whom we had
seen in the Captain’s cabin. He was talking to a policeman, who, as we
passed, turned his eyes in our direction and laughed at something the
small man said. The sound of the laugh was a great relief to us. If we
were the objects of it, well and good. The policeman might laugh at us
as much as he liked, provided he did not interfere with us. To tell the
truth, we had been somewhat apprehensive lest we might on landing be
snapped up by the authorities and shipped off to England, willy-nilly.

Among the many steamboats of extraordinary shape--as they seemed to
me--lying along the levee we soon found one about to start up the
river, and stepping on board we addressed ourselves to one who appeared
to be in authority--an authority he maintained, seemingly, by the use
of a copious and needless flow of profane language.

“Well, what do you want?” asked this personage, turning upon us as
though he had been a dog, and we had come to steal his bone.

We stated our desires and our qualifications, with the result that we
both secured places as “roustabouts”; and thoroughly disgusted were we
both with our tasks long before we reached St. Louis. It was not so
much the nature of the work to which we objected, nor was it to the
society of the negroes and poor-whites with whom we were herded; our
main objection was to the stream of foul language for ever being poured
upon us by “his profanic majesty,” as Percy called him, the Mate. It
required all our resolution not to desert half-a-dozen times on the way
up, but being determined to stick to our plan, if possible, we managed
to hold on until, at last, the ordeal was over, and we found ourselves
one day walking, free and untrammelled, in the streets of St. Louis.

The first thing we did on landing was to enter a cheap clothing store
and purchase some underclothes--a much-needed addition to our wardrobe.
As we were going out again we brushed past a man who was trying on a
new necktie before a looking-glass, and happening to look into the
glass, I saw, rather to my surprise, that it was the small, sharp-faced
man whom we had twice seen in New Orleans. It struck me as being an odd
coincidence, but nothing more, and I did not even mention it to Percy.

Betaking ourselves next to a little eating-house, we ordered some
dinner, and while waiting for it Percy amused himself and me by reading
items from the old newspaper in which our clothes were wrapped.
Presently he gave a subdued whistle, and after glancing around the room
to see if anyone was observing us, he leaned across the table and said,
softly:

“Tom, here’s something about us. Listen. ‘The police of Philadelphia
have been requested by the Chief-Constable of Southampton, England, to
look out for two runaway boys. The names of the boys are Per’--there’s
a piece torn out here, but lower down it goes on--‘has many relatives
in Philadelphia, and it is expected they will probably make for that
city.’”

This was a dreadful shock to us. Here was our line of retreat cut
off, so to say. The mention of the Chief-Constable of Southampton
fully convinced us that the paragraph emanated from Sir Anthony, whose
resentment at having his pheasants shot and his keepers entrapped we
pictured to ourselves in lively colours. Doubtless, we thought, the
police of Philadelphia were all on the lookout, and should we venture
within the limits of that city we should instantly be pounced upon by
them and sent back across the water to be delivered into the clutches
of the vengeful Sir Anthony. What were we to do?

We ate our dinner in silence and perturbation of spirit, and, still
undecided as to our future course, we were about to rise and go out,
when Percy, with a thump upon the table, suddenly exclaimed:

“I know what we’ll do, Tom.”

“What?” I asked.

“Instead of going east, we’ll go west. We’ll go to Ogden in Utah.”

“Where’s Ogdenenutah?” said I, thinking it was all one word.

“In the Rocky Mountains.”

“Is it? That will suit me. I’ve always wanted to see the Rocky
Mountains. But why should we go to that place with the long name in
particular?”

“Because I have an uncle and a cousin living in a mining town called
Golconda, not far from there. I have not seen them since I was a little
bit of a boy, but I have heard my father talk of them, and I am sure
they will be just the ones to tell us what we ought to do.”

“All right,” said I. “Let us go to Ogdenenutah. How are we to get
there?”

“Why, I think we had better go part way by train and part way on foot.
It won’t do to spend all our money on railway tickets, because there’s
no knowing what may turn up. We will go by train as far as we think we
can afford to go, and walk the rest of the way to Ogden--Ogden in the
Territory of Utah, you old stupid!”

“Very well,” said I, nodding my head in approval. “We’ll go to Ogden in
the Territory of Utah. How far do you suppose we shall have to walk?”

“I can’t say for certain, of course, until I see how far our money will
take us, but five hundred miles perhaps,--possibly more.”

“Phew!” I whistled. “That is something like a walk. Never mind. We’ll
do it. We’ll go to the Territory of Ogden in Utah if we have to hop.”


[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV

THE MAN WITH THE SQUEAKY VOICE


Little did we realise the magnitude of the task we were undertaking,
when, having first written home to explain our reasons for this sudden
change of plan, we betook ourselves to the railroad station and
started, with fairly clear consciences, on our westward course. In due
time we descended from the train at a little station which appeared
to have been set down in the midst of nowhere, whence, with all the
confidence of youth and ignorance, we set forth upon our tremendous
tramp across the plains.

For a whole month thereafter we marched steadily and perseveringly
along the endless railroad track; and never, I firmly believe, were two
boys so utterly and completely tired as were we by the end of that time.

If our sea-voyage had been monotonous, this voyage across the solid
sea of the rolling plains was even more so. Day after day the same
green circle of hills surrounded us; every little town we passed was as
like the last as one pea is like another; such a perpetual sameness in
the landscape was there that we might have thought we were walking in a
circle, but for the sun, which every morning rose behind us, and every
evening shone in our faces.

The only break in the monotony of our wearisome task was an incident
which occurred perhaps half-a-dozen times; an incident with which we
could very well have dispensed, for the reason that by no means could
we make head or tail to it.

Every now and then, as we came plodding along the track, each with a
stick in his hand and a rolled-up blanket over his shoulder, we would,
on passing through a station, find the agent standing on the platform,
watching our approach, and grinning as though he saw something in our
appearance that was irresistibly amusing. Sometimes he would merely eye
us as we went by; at other times he would greet us in some such fashion
as this:

“Well, boys; glad to see you. Had a longish walk, haven’t you? Getting
pretty tired? Well, don’t let me detain you; you’ve got a tidy bit to
walk yet. Good-bye.”

Then, laughing to himself, he would go back to his clicking telegraph
instrument, while we walked on, wondering how he came to make so good
a guess concerning us and our affairs. It really seemed as though
these men must have been expecting us, had such a thing been possible.
It was very puzzling; we were quite at a loss to account for their
extraordinary behaviour.

On one of these occasions I caught a glimpse through the window of the
waiting-room of a face which somehow seemed familiar. For a moment
I thought it was the man whom we had seen in the Captain’s cabin at
New Orleans, but as such a thing appeared to be out of the question I
dismissed the idea without a second thought.

In the early part of our walk we were fortunate in the matter of
finding a lodging for the night. Our practice was, when the sun began
to get low, to look out for a farmhouse of decent appearance, and
having first washed off the dust of travel and made ourselves as
presentable as possible, to apply for leave to sleep in the barn; a
permission which was nearly always accorded.

But by the time we had come somewhere towards the middle of Nebraska
this condition of affairs had changed. It is true that we were still
kindly received at the farmhouses, but the farmhouses were more widely
scattered, and the farther we advanced the less frequent they became.
In consequence, we had now and then been benighted on the prairie; on
which occasions, especially if it happened to be a windy or a rainy
night, we found that the pleasure of camping out lay more in the
imagination than the reality.

The farther we went, too, the more tired we grew. It seemed almost
impossible sometimes to summon up energy enough to go on when the
rising sun warned us that it was time to start on another day’s tramp.
In fact, we were beginning to entertain uncomfortable suspicions that
we had undertaken more than we could accomplish, when there occurred an
incident which relieved us of all further anxiety on that score.

We had been toiling all day against a strong west wind, the sun had
gone down an hour ago, we were out on the wide, open plain, with never
a house in sight, and, thoroughly weary, we had decided to camp in
the first sheltered spot we could find, when we came upon a small
trestle-bridge spanning a narrow, but deep, gully. Across this bridge
we had walked in order to get under the lee of the creek-bank, when,
looking back, we saw on the side we had just left a little tumble-down
cabin. We at once retraced our steps, and scrambling down the side of
the gully, we approached the building. It was evidently very old. The
door was gone; the mud chinking had all fallen out; while, of two bunks
built against the end wall, one above the other, the upper one only was
sound.

Poor as this shelter was, it was better than none, and we at once
decided to take up our quarters there for the night. We were too
tired to go and hunt for fire-wood in the dark, so, unwrapping from
a greasy newspaper some slices of cooked ham which we had purchased
that morning, we made a chilly and comfortless meal, and then, having
re-wrapped and re-pocketed the remnants of the ham, we climbed into the
crazy upper bunk, rolled ourselves in our blankets, and were soon sound
asleep, in spite of the insinuating draughts, and the trembling of the
rickety old structure before the assaults of the blustering wind.

How long we had slept we did not know, when we were awakened by the
sudden entrance into the cabin of several men, who, unconscious that
there were any listeners, began talking together in loud, rough voices.
With an instinctive feeling that it would be better for us to remain
undiscovered, Percy and I lay silent; wondering what could have brought
these men here at this time of night, and why they should carry on
their conversation in the dark. We very soon found out.

“What time does she come along?” asked one of the men.

“She’s due at the water-tank in an hour. That’ll give us plenty of
time. Now, which are we going to do--signal her, and go through the
mail and express cars and the passengers, or pull up a rail and let her
take a header through the trestle?”

“Pull up a rail,” growled a third voice--and a very remarkable voice it
was too. The man began his remarks in the deepest bass, but after two
or three words his voice broke and went off into a thin, treble pipe.
It was a voice, once heard, never to be forgotten.

“Pull up a rail,” said the man. “That’s the surest way, by long odds.
We’ll pull out the spikes and take off the fish-plates and tilt
the rail a bit, and she’ll jump the track sure. Then two of us’ll
go through the express car while the other two goes through the
passengers--them as isn’t killed.”

At the disclosure of this villainous scheme Percy and I quaked with
fear. Our bunk was not so high but that a tall man could overlook
it, and should one of them strike a match for any purpose he could
hardly fail to discover us, and discovery, we had little doubt, would
mean death; for that they should feel any compunction at putting two
witnesses out of the way was not to be expected of these ineffable
rascals, who, for the sake of a few dollars, were planning in cold
blood the murder of an unknown number of innocent people.

“That’s the way we’ll fix it,” continued he of the squeaky voice,
clapping his hand upon the edge of the bunk close to my face, and
making me start so that my heart seemed to go off like an alarm-clock.
“And, see here, boys; after we’ve tilted one rail, we may’s well put in
the rest of the time pulling out the spikes all along the lower side of
the trestle, so’s to make a sure job of it. While three of us is doing
that, one can keep watch on the hill for the headlight, ’cause we won’t
be able to hear her coming up against this wind, and when he gives the
word we’ll hustle back to this old shanty.”

“That’s a good scheme. Come on. Who’s got them tools?”

“Me.”

“Bring ’em along, then, and let’s get to work.”

To our infinite relief the four villains filed out of the cabin,
and the sound of their retreating footsteps was quickly lost in the
whistling of the wind. After lying quite still for a moment I ventured
to move enough to enable me to peep through one of the chinks in the
wall. In the dim light--for, though there was a full moon, the sky was
obscured by a thin layer of cloud--I could see the men walking one
behind the other down towards the bridge. As soon as they disappeared
from sight I whispered to Percy to turn out, and the next moment we
were through the doorway and hurrying off up-stream.

“Tom,” Percy hastily exclaimed, after we had gone a hundred yards, “we
must climb over the hill and get back to the track below the bridge and
signal that train.”

“Yes,” I responded. “But first we have to find a place where we can
climb up this cliff; it is too steep here.”

We consumed ten or fifteen minutes of precious time searching for an
available spot, but at last we found a place where the bluff had broken
away, and clambering quickly to the top, we hurried over the hill and
down to the railroad, where we set off down-wind as fast as we could
walk--being afraid to run in the dark lest we should break our legs by
tumbling through a cattle-guard.

We had gone about half a mile, perhaps, when, looking back, we saw,
dimly outlined against the luminous grey sky, the figure of the watcher
on the hill. Though it was unlikely that he should be able to see us,
we were afraid to risk it, and we therefore stepped from the track and
lay down on the lower side of the embankment, whence we could keep a
lookout down the line, and also maintain a watch upon the watcher.

“How are we going to signal the train, Tom?” asked Percy. “We have no
lantern, and we haven’t time to collect material to build a fire on the
track; and if we did so that fellow back there would see it, of course,
and the whole rascally gang would be after us directly. And besides
that the train might be late and our fire might burn out before it got
here.”

“The only way I see,” I replied, “is to use the newspaper that the ham
is wrapped up in. We must wait till the train is pretty near and then
light the paper, trusting to its being seen before it burns out.”

“That’s a good idea,” Percy responded, “but I think I know a better
way still. I will crawl down the bank here and cut a willow stick; we
will split the end of it and insert the newspaper, ham and all, into
the cleft, and then we shall have a torch which will last five or ten
minutes.”

In accordance with Percy’s idea we soon had our torch prepared, and
again we lay still, waiting. Some forty slow minutes dragged along,
when we thought we could detect a tremor in the rails close to our
heads. We were right, for directly afterwards the headlight of the
engine appeared coming round the bend. I glanced back at the watchman;
he was still at his post, having not yet seen the light on account of
the curve in the road. A moment later, however, the increase in the
size of the headlight showed that the train had turned the corner,
and at the same instant I saw the man on the hill turn and run. As he
disappeared from view I called to Percy to light up, and Percy, who
was holding six matches in readiness, struck them all at once, and
sheltering the flame from the wind as best he could, applied it to the
paper. The greasy material flared up in an instant, and seizing the
stick I sprang into the middle of the track and waved the light to and
fro in front of me.

Thanks to the frying ham--and never was a slice of ham put to a better
use--our improvised torch made a very large blaze, and presently,
to our great satisfaction, we heard faintly against the wind the
_toot-toot_ of the whistle, showing that our signal was observed. We at
once walked quickly towards the train, and just as our torch fell to
pieces we saw two men coming up the track,--the conductor and one of
the brakemen.

“Well, boys,” said the former, as he held up his lantern to look at us,
“what did you signal us for? Bridge gone?”

“Train-wreckers,” said Percy. “They’ve pulled up a rail on the trestle.”

The conductor whistled. “How did you come to know of it?” he asked.

“We heard them laying their plans about an hour ago, and so we hurried
down the track to stop you.”

“How many of them?” asked the brakeman.

[Illustration: “I WAVED THE LIGHT TO AND FRO IN FRONT OF ME.”]

“Four. They are waiting for you in a little cabin near the bridge.”

The two men nodded to each other; they evidently knew the place; and
then the conductor, telling us to follow him, led the way back to the
train. At the engine he stopped, and addressing the engineer, said:

“George, these boys report a gang of train-wreckers. They’ve pulled
up a rail on the trestle. They are waiting in that old cabin up the
gully, and I’m going into the smoker to see if I can’t arrange a little
surprise-party for them. When I give the signal, you go ahead slowly.”

“All right,” replied the engineer. “And, say, Barclay, see if you can
borrow a gun for me; I’d like to take a hand in this little expedition
of yours myself.”

The smoking-car was pretty full of passengers, most of them big,
brown-faced fellows, miners and stockmen on their way to the mountains.
They were lying about on the seats in all sorts of contorted positions,
trying to get a little sleep, but no sooner had the conductor in a
loud voice reported our story than the scene changed as if by magic.
Each one of these peaceful citizens appeared to have a big revolver
concealed somewhere within easy reach, and about twenty of them
instantly volunteered to take a share in the proposed surprise-party.
The signal, therefore, being given, the train moved on towards the
bridge. In about five minutes it stopped again, and the conductor, with
an extra revolver in his hand, stepped from the car, followed by his
volunteer posse; we boys wisely remaining behind.

For half an hour the trainmen and all the other occupants of the car
stood around the panting engine whispering together and waiting for
a shot. No shot came, however, and presently we saw the party coming
clambering up again from the gully. We looked in vain for prisoners.
They were returning empty-handed. Without doubt the robbers had taken
alarm and fled, for the posse had found no sign of them about the cabin
save the marks of their boots in the dust, and an odour of bad tobacco.

The next thing to be done was to examine the bridge, where a brief
inspection showed that the would-be wreckers had performed their task
with much thoroughness; so, as the train carried none of the tools and
materials necessary for making repairs, the conductor, accompanied by
six of the armed passengers, set off to bring assistance from the
nearest section-house two miles farther up the line.

During the interval of waiting that ensued, Percy and I were the
objects of general interest. We were made to tell our story with
every detail; eliciting great applause when we described how we had
sacrificed our next morning’s breakfast in order to make a torch.
All the passengers who were awake, and all the train-crew besides,
came up to shake hands with us and thank us, and to say all sorts of
complimentary things; in fact it was quite an ovation, which lasted
until the conductor had returned with the section-hands and the damaged
bridge had been made safe again.

The train was ready to proceed. Before it did so, however, we asked
the conductor if he would not allow us to ride with him for an hour or
so, explaining that we were afraid the wreckers might come back, in
which case it might go hard with us; for though it was unlikely that
they were aware of our existence, it was still possible that they might
have seen our signal, and if they should guess that it was we who had
frustrated their plan----

At this point of our explanation the conductor broke in:

“Let you ride!” he exclaimed. “You bet I’ll let you ride. I’ve
telegraphed the Superintendent from the section-station, and you shall
ride until I get word from him what I’m to do with you.”

Accordingly, when the train moved on, we moved on too, and finding two
unoccupied seats we coiled ourselves up in them, and were soon sound
asleep.

We had no reason to regret the sacrifice of our slices of ham, for
when the train stopped at the eating-station next morning we received
from the occupants of the smoking-car alone sixteen invitations to
breakfast, and if we could have eaten them I believe we might have had
sixty, for by this time the passengers in the other cars, most of whom
had been unaware that anything unusual had happened during the night,
had been told the story, and once more we were overwhelmed with thanks
and questions and handshakings.

We were still at breakfast when the conductor came in with a telegram
in his hand; it was a message from the Superintendent instructing him
to carry us on our journey as far as we wished to go, and to see that
we were well fed all the way at the expense of the company; adding,
also, his personal thanks for our service.

This assurance of a free ride to Ogden, together with the frequently
expressed gratitude and the complimentary remarks of the passengers
was a very acceptable outcome of the night’s adventure. There was one
other consequence of the episode, however, which was less gratifying:
the newspaper interviewers sought us out. They wanted to know all
about us; our names, where we came from, whither we were going, what
we intended to do when we arrived there, and the why and the wherefore
of everything. Though we avoided as much as possible making any
explicit reply to these questions, we nevertheless found ourselves
once more figuring in the newspapers, with a full description of our
personal appearance and as many details of our private history as these
gentlemen could gather or guess at,--much to our discomfort; for we
were apprehensive lest somebody, seeing this report, might connect it
with the paragraph in the Philadelphia paper, with the result that we
might find a policeman waiting for us at one of the stopping-places.

This harassing idea deprived us of much of the pleasure we should
otherwise have taken in our ride; even our delight at the first sight
of the mountains--and what a glorious sight that is!--was marred by
it. Seemingly, however, our fears were groundless; at any rate, no
policeman had as yet put in an appearance when, by examining a railroad
map, we saw that our journey was nearly ended.

“We shall be in Ogden in an hour,” said Percy, folding up the map.

But Percy was wrong. Instead of an hour it was a large part of a year
before we arrived at Ogden; and the course we took to get there led us
over more than a thousand miles of mountainous country, and through
scenes such as do not often fall within the experience of a schoolboy.


[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER V

JACK; AND WHAT HE HAD TO SAY


At one of the little stations at which we stopped, a man boarded the
train, and taking a seat opposite at once fell into conversation with
us. He appeared to be familiar with the country round about, and, on
our mentioning our intention of walking to Golconda, where Percy’s
uncle and cousin lived, he told us all about the place and how to get
to it; informing us that by continuing our journey as far as Ogden we
should only be going out of our way, for if we should alight instead
at the next station we might save some fifteen miles of unnecessary
walking. As Percy and I had no object in visiting Ogden but to leave it
again as soon as possible, we decided to follow our adviser’s counsel,
and stepping from the train accordingly, we set off on foot along a
waggon-trail which led away in the direction of the hills.

Our waggon-trail led us presently into a well-defined road, and along
this we pursued our way for many miles, most of the distance being
up-hill; and hard work we found it to walk quickly and steadily at that
unfamiliar altitude. At length, having ascended a long and very steep
hill, we sat down upon some stones by the wayside to rest. As we sat
there we observed, coming up the road at an easy canter, two horsemen,
one of whom, as soon as he arrived at the bottom of the hill, alighted
from his horse and proceeded to walk up on foot; the other continuing
to ride.

“That is a considerate fellow,” said Percy. “It isn’t everybody who
would walk up this hill just to please his horse.”

“No,” I responded, “and the horse seems to know it; see how closely he
walks behind; the man is not holding the bridle either.”

As the travellers came up the hill we observed that the one on foot was
a tall young fellow of about twenty, brown-faced and grey-eyed, with a
firmness about the mouth and a thoughtfulness of expression not usual
in one of his age. But the other! To my great astonishment the other
was the small, sharp-faced man of whom I have made mention on two or
three previous occasions. How came he here? Had his presence anything
to do with us? Before I could come to any conclusion or say anything
to Percy on the subject the pair came opposite to where we sat, and
stopped.

“Good-morning,” exclaimed the young fellow, mopping his face with his
handkerchief. “Pretty hot, isn’t it? Which way are you going; up or
down?”

“Up,” replied Percy. “We are on our way to Golconda. Do you happen to
know the place?”

“Oh, yes. Very well. I live there.”

“Do you? Then do you know a gentleman there named Harding, or his son,
Jack Harding?”

“Yes,” replied the stranger.

“They are living there still, I suppose?” said Percy, with some
anxiety; for, though he had said nothing to me on the subject, he had
been worrying himself a good deal over the idea that his uncle might
have left the place--and what would become of us then?

Instead of replying the stranger looked hard at Percy for a moment,
and then, breaking into a smile which displayed a row of strong, white
teeth, he stretched out his hand and said:

“How are you, Percy?”

For an instant we stared at him in astonishment, when, all at once, it
flashed upon us who it was.

“Why, it’s Jack!” cried Percy. “It is you, isn’t it, Jack?”

“Yes; it’s me, all right,” replied Jack, forgetting his grammar for the
moment. “And this is your English friend, Tom Swayne, of course.”

“Yes,” said I, shaking hands with him with great satisfaction; “and
uncommonly glad I am to see you.”

“But, Jack,” Percy exclaimed, as the thought suddenly came into his
head, “how did you know I had an English friend named Tom Swayne?”

At this question Jack, by way of reply, burst into a merry laugh, in
which, to our surprise, the small man on the horse joined.

“Well, Mr. Harding,” said the latter, “I may as well turn round now
and go back to Ogden. My part of the business is completed with the
delivery of the goods. You might just give me a receipt for them, if
you will.”

“All right, Jenkins,” replied Jack. And taking a pencil and a piece of
paper from his pocket he wrote rapidly, and then went on: “Will this
do? ‘Received of Hiram Jenkins one Percy Goodall and one Tom Swayne, in
good condition. John Harding.’”

“That will do, sir, thank you,” the small man answered, laughing and
pocketing the paper. “Good-bye, sir. Good-bye, young gentlemen. I’m
glad you’ve got here at last. You’ve been a longish time about it,
though, haven’t you? Good-bye.”

With that he turned his horse and rode off down the hill, while Percy
and I, in a state of the blankest bewilderment, looked alternately at
each other and at Jack, who, standing with his arm across his horse’s
neck, was regarding us with a broad and cheerful grin.

“Jack!” exclaimed Percy, at last. “What’s the meaning of all this? What
has that man to do with us? How--why--what--_what_ is the meaning of
it?”

At this Jack once more broke into a laugh, and stepping forward,
clapped one hand upon Percy’s shoulder and the other on mine, and said:

“Percy, old fellow, and you, Tom,--I suppose I may call you
‘Tom’?--forgive me for laughing; but there is such a joke against you
two. I’ve been expecting you any day for the past month. That man has
been attending upon your footsteps ever since the morning you landed
in New Orleans. I have letters from home for both of you up at the
house where I am staying. I know all about your poaching scrape, and
your trip across the ocean and up the Mississippi, and your walk across
Nebraska, and the train-wreckers’ episode, and how the station-agents
along the line used to joke you as you went by, and----”

“But how, Jack? How?” we both cried, rendered desperate by this
enumeration, which only increased the bewilderment of our already
sufficiently puzzled brains.

“Come over here by the stream,” replied Jack. “There is a nice bunch of
trees. We can sit down in the shade, and I’ll tell you all about it.”

But to make matters intelligible I must deprive Jack of the honor of
telling the story himself, and must add to it a few details with which
he was unacquainted. To do so I must go back to the night when Percy
and I escaped--as we thought--the terrors of the law by running away
from Moseley’s.

It was not until the morning following our “escape” that our absence
was discovered,--Percy’s sheet waving in the wind was the first
intimation that something was amiss,--but as soon as the discovery was
made there ensued some pretty lively bustle in the little community.

Bates and the keepers were rescued from the “den,” Mr. Goodall was
notified, and as soon as he arrived and my parents returned home a
meeting of the elders was held at the vicarage; Sir Anthony being of
the number. The old Baronet was half amused and half indignant that
we should have supposed him to be so harsh and undiscriminating as to
prosecute two thoughtless boys for an offence which they did not know
was an offence. But, “It is just like boys, though,” said he. “They
never do stop to think.”

The witnesses were examined, and with the help of Percy’s and my
letters a pretty true understanding of the incident was arrived at.

To dispose of one part of my story at a time, I may say that Bates’s
share in the transaction showed up so unpleasantly that, as a
consequence, he drove away late that evening to the railway-station.
His school-days were over.

Going up to London, he there had an interview with the old lawyer, his
guardian, to whom he expressed his determination to return to school
no more. He had had schooling enough; he was nineteen years old; he
would like to see something of the world.

Very well. What part of the world would he like to visit? France?
Italy? Germany?

No. What was the use of going to countries where he could not speak the
language? He would like to visit the United States.

To this desire his unsympathetic old guardian, glad to be rid of
him, gave his consent; and so it came about that, while Percy and I
were working our passage to New Orleans, Bates was suffering all the
miseries of sea-sickness somewhere between Liverpool and New York,
we being, of course, as ignorant of his movements as he was of ours.
Little could Bates have imagined, when he laid his plot to oust us from
Moseley’s, that the result of its success would be to lead us, all
three, such a wild dance as it did.

But to return to the conclave assembled in the vicarage parlour: my
father and mother, Mr. Goodall, the Head-master, and Sir Anthony.

A liberal use of the telegraph soon settled the question as to what
had become of us. In reply to a message to the Chief-Constable of
Southampton, information was received that a policeman had that
morning noticed two boys, calling each other Tom and Percy, looking
very tired, dusty, and unwashed, go on board the _Louisiana_, Captain
Murchison, bound for New Orleans, and that they had not come ashore
again. Further inquiry having made it quite certain that we were
the unwashed boys referred to, our seniors fell to discussing the
course of action that should be adopted. Sir Anthony and my mother
represented the two extremes of opinion. The former advised that as we
had brought ourselves into this scrape we might very well be allowed to
get ourselves out again, we having--he was kind enough to say--plenty
of sense and plenty of courage. My mother, on the other hand, was
for telegraphing the passage-money to New Orleans to bring us back
instantly.

But as Mr. Goodall, being an American, was much more likely than anyone
else to be able to suggest a feasible course of action, the others
turned to him for his opinion.

“I think,” said Mr. Goodall, “that we can make a compromise between
Mrs. Swayne’s idea and Sir Anthony’s. It would be interesting to see
how the boys would get out of their scrape by themselves, and this, I
believe, may be done without running any risk of permitting them to get
into trouble. I will tell you my idea, and if you agree I will see that
it is carried out.

“The boys, presumably, have not much money. It is possible that they
may, on landing, telegraph home for funds. If they do not, there
is no doubt, I think, but that they will try to make their way to
Philadelphia--my home, you know--by some means or other. Now, this is
what I propose to do: There is in Philadelphia a man, by name Hiram
Jenkins, whom I have frequently employed on private and particular
business, a thoroughly trustworthy and most astute fellow. I will send
full instructions to Jenkins to go at once to New Orleans, and there
to await the arrival of the _Louisiana_. He shall keep a close watch
upon the boys, follow their footsteps wherever they go, and, should
the occasion arise, shall make himself known to them. Otherwise--if no
such occasion should arise, I mean--he shall not interfere with them,
but shall allow them to get out of their difficulties by their own wit.
He shall communicate with us at frequent intervals, so that we may
know all the time what the boys are doing and where they are. Thus,
Mrs. Swayne, your mind will be relieved, and the boys will have an
opportunity to show how much of resourcefulness there is in them. Now,
what do you think of that?”

The three gentlemen at once declared their approval of the plan,
and after a thorough discussion my mother, too, albeit with some
reluctance, gave in to their opinion. Mr. Goodall immediately set about
making the necessary arrangements, with the result that when we arrived
in New Orleans, there, all unsuspected by us, was Hiram Jenkins,
waiting to act the part of watch-dog to us in our course across the
continent.

While we, in the unenviable position of roustabouts, worked our
toilsome way up the Mississippi, Jenkins, on the same boat, was
travelling comfortably among the passengers. When we, at St. Louis,
unexpectedly turned westward, Jenkins rode on the same train with us.
When we set out to walk across the plains, Jenkins, procuring a horse
and light cart, trotted along the country roads which followed the
railroad track, stopping at the different stations until we made our
appearance, and then driving on to the next one.

It seemed to him such an exquisite joke that two boys should thus
painfully tramp across the country,--perseveringly running away from
nothing,--that, feeling sure the station-agents would appreciate the
joke too well to spoil it, he would let them into the secret; and while
the agent, standing on the platform, would jocularly cheer us on our
way, Jenkins would be sitting in the waiting-room, taking his ease,
until such time as it should become necessary for him to drive on again.

After the episode of the train-wreckers Jenkins might perhaps have lost
us for a time had it not been for the fact that he was staying for the
night at the station to which the conductor had gone for assistance,
and walking back with him to the train had heard our request to be
carried on. Promptly abandoning his horse and cart, he once more rode
on the train with us, occupying a different car. By our action in
getting off short of Ogden he did lose us for the moment, but having
found out from our talkative acquaintance that we were going to walk
to Golconda, he went on to Ogden, where he met Jack, who had ridden
down to meet us, Jenkins having kept him, as well as the folks at home,
informed of our whereabouts.

Setting out at once on horseback, the pair overtook us when we were yet
two or three miles from our destination, and there Jenkins, his mission
accomplished, turned back to town, whence he sent to Percy’s father the
prearranged telegraphic message, “Goods delivered.”

When Jack had reached this point in his story he stopped. He was
too kind-hearted to laugh at us again, knowing pretty well what was
passing in our minds, and for a time all three sat silent, Percy and I
furtively eying each other meanwhile.

How exceedingly small we did feel! To think that we had taken all
this trouble, suffered all these discomforts, travelled all this
distance,--for nothing!

As I watched Percy, however, I presently saw a change come over his
face. He raised his head and sat up straight; then, to the great
astonishment of Toby, Jack’s horse, he suddenly sprang to his feet,
dashed his hat upon the ground, and, snapping his fingers and thumbs,
shouted “Hurrah!” at the very top of his voice; at the same time waving
his arms above his head, and spinning round first on one foot and then
on the other.

_I_ knew what he was thinking about, because I was thinking the very
same thing myself. I jumped up, too, kicked Percy’s hat far away into
the bushes, hurled my own after it, and joined him in his shouting and
capering and generally absurd behaviour; while Jack leaned back against
a tree and laughed until the tears ran out of his eyes.

“Hold up, hold up, you two lunatics!” he cried, at last. “Don’t you
think you’ve made yourselves ridiculous enough already without winding
up in this way?”

At this we rushed upon Jack, each seized one of his hands and shook it
as though he were a long-lost friend whom we had expected never to see
again, and at last, entirely out of breath, we flopped down on either
side of him and sat there panting.

“May I inquire,” said Jack, with extreme politeness, “whether this is
your usual style of behaviour, or whether the altitude has affected
your brains? Or were you, perhaps, merely born foolish?”

It was our turn to laugh. In fact, we felt so light-hearted we were
ready to laugh at anything--ourselves included. What did we care about
having made ourselves ridiculous! When we thought of how our parents
had never been worried about us all this time; how they had kept watch
over us without our knowing it; how, too, Sir Anthony had never thought
of putting us into jail at all,--the relief to our minds was such that
it was no wonder we “carried on” in this flighty manner. For the first
time in six or seven weeks we felt free from anxiety. All the policemen
in England and America could not make us tremble. We were fugitives no
longer!

“But, Jack,” said Percy, after we had sat for some time asking
innumerable questions of our new friend, “what is going to become of us
now?”

“That is for you to say,” replied Jack. “I have a letter of
instructions up at the house. You are to have your choice: you may go
straight home again if you like, or--” Jack paused, and sat eying us in
a critical manner, as if he were taking our measure; “sizing us up,” as
he would have expressed it.

“Or what?” exclaimed Percy and I, together.

“Or this. What do you say to cutting loose from civilization
altogether; riding away into the mountains; camping out all summer;
living on what we can shoot; and prospecting for gold as we go?”

So magnificent an idea fairly took away our breath for a moment, but
then, with one voice, we cried enthusiastically: “I say ‘Yes.’”

“All right,” said Jack. “Then that is what we will do; and uncommonly
glad I shall be of your company. You can be of great help to me; for,
as soon as you have learned to shoot straight, I shall leave to you
the task of providing the camp with game, and that will set me free to
go prospecting. You see,” he went on, “I am very anxious to find gold,
if possible; for this reason: My father owns a silver mine here in
Golconda. He has done an immense amount of work upon it, and has spent
a great deal of money in developing it, but just as we were going to
begin stoping,--that is, taking out the ore,--a blast in the bottom of
the shaft broke into an underground reservoir, apparently. At any rate,
the water rushed in and drove out the miners; we rigged a bucket and
tried what that would do, but it was quite useless; nothing short of a
good pumping-engine will keep the water down.

“Unfortunately my father cannot afford to buy one, for he had just
expended the last of his available money in building a comfortable
house for my mother and sister, who were coming out to live with
us--and now they can’t come! My father has gone East to try to borrow
the necessary money, but if he should fail,--why, then I don’t know
what we shall do. So you see why it is that I am so particularly
anxious to find a gold-placer--though, of course, it is most unlikely
that I shall be able to do so; especially as I don’t know anything of
gold-washing.”

“I see,” said Percy. “How much money will it require to buy a
pumping-engine, and to start up the mine again?”

“Five thousand dollars, perhaps,” replied Jack. “Besides the cost of
the pump, there is likely to be a great deal of work to be done in the
mine after the water is taken out,--replacing timbers, and cleaning out
the drifts, which are very apt to cave in after a prolonged soaking.”

“Well,” continued Percy, “if we should find a placer, is it likely to
be worth that much?”

“There’s no telling,” replied Jack. “But if we find one at all, we want
to find one worth more than that, because, you see, there’s your share
to come out.”

“Our share!” exclaimed Percy. “Oh, we don’t want a share.”

“No,” I chimed in. “Ours is a pleasure-trip. We don’t want a share.”

“That wouldn’t be fair,” said Jack. “If you do part of the work you
must have part of the pay--if there is any.”

“Well, I don’t see that,” Percy objected. “We neither of us know
anything about prospecting. As for myself, I couldn’t tell the
difference between native gold and native brass--if there is such a
thing.”

“Which there isn’t,” said Jack, laughing.

“Look here,” I interrupted. “I think I see a way out of this. If we
should find a placer,--whatever that is,--the first five thousand
dollars that come out of it, if so much ever does come out of it, shall
go to Jack, or, rather, to Mr. Harding, and anything over shall be
divided equally between the three of us. If our share shall be enough
to pay our way home, so much the better.”

“That is a first-rate idea,” said Percy, emphatically; and in spite of
Jack’s protests we stuck to our point until, at last, he gave in.

“Well, you fellows,” said he, “that is mighty good of you. Whether we
find anything or not, I’m much obliged to you beforehand. But, come.
We must be moving. It is past supper-time already, and we have nearly
three miles to go yet.”

In course of time we came in sight of a ranch, and Jack, pointing to
it, said: “There’s our destination. You see, as my father expected to
be absent from Golconda for several months he has rented our house in
the town, and in consequence I have taken up my abode with a friend, a
ranchman named George Catlin.”

The jolly ranchman welcomed us to his house, and we felt ourselves at
home directly. It is true he poked fun at us in a good-natured way
on the subject of our late escapade, but it was little we cared for
that when Jack handed over to us letters from our parents, and one,
addressed to both, from Sir Anthony.

To think that we had ever run away from such friends! How kind the
letters were! Not a word of blame in them; merely an intimation that
we had acted too hastily and rather foolishly, and an assurance that
had we been twice as hasty and twice as foolish it would have made no
difference in the welcome that was always awaiting us at home.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI

TWO OLD ACQUAINTANCES


A happy and well-satisfied pair were we when, next day, after writing
voluminous letters home, we set about making preparations for our
projected expedition into the mountains.

First of all there were the animals to be seen to. Jack already had a
horse for himself,--Toby,--and he had besides a pair of stout little
mules for packing purposes, one of which was named Calliope, because,
under favourable atmospheric conditions, her voice might be heard at
a distance of a thousand miles (at least, so Jack said), while the
other, on account of his somnolent habits, and his proclivity for
eating everything that came in his way, especially things not intended
for him, had had bestowed upon him the name of Joe, in memory of the
Fat Boy in _Pickwick_. Besides these, Jack procured for Percy’s use a
smart little grey mare, and for me a big-boned, buckskin pony, which,
though no beauty to look at, had a great reputation as a stayer.

Last of the animals, though perhaps not least in importance, was Jack’s
big, rough-coated, nondescript dog, who had been named Ulysses after
the President of the United States, for the reason that, though of a
peace-loving nature, he did, when once he got into a squabble, evince a
determination to “fight it out on that line if it took all summer.”

Jack’s next care was to provide us each with a rifle and cartridges,
a suit of clothes adapted to a life in the wilds, and two pairs of
blankets. Then there was the purchase of provisions, consisting mainly
of flour and bacon, tea and sugar, and a sack of dried apples; and
lastly came the necessary utensils,--a few pots and pans, tin plates
and cups, a shovel, a pick, an axe, and the gold-pan; the last-named
being a large copper pan with “flaring” sides which Percy and I
supposed to be a dish-pan until Jack explained its use.

On the eventful morning that had been fixed upon for the start we were
roused from our slumbers by the voice of the ranchman booming up the
stairs,--“Roll out, roll out! Half-past five, and breakfast waiting!”
and after sundry groans and yawns we bounced out of bed, scrambled into
our clothes, and descended to the room below, where a good wash in cold
water soon freshened us up.

Breakfast over, the beasts were brought out and we proceeded to pack
the mules with our various belongings, or, to speak more correctly,
Jack and the ranchman proceeded to pack, while Percy and I looked on;
for, being as yet unacquainted with the mysteries of the “diamond
hitch,” and all the other arrangements of ropes necessary to the
securing of a pack upon a mule, we should only have delayed matters had
we attempted to assist.

Under the hands of these two experts, however, the work was
accomplished with great celerity. In the course of about half an hour
our two stout little mules were loaded with packs weighing something
like two hundred pounds apiece, the horses were saddled, and we were
ready to start, and after a cordial handshake from our host, the word
was given and away we went; Jack first, then the two mules, and Percy
and I bringing up the rear.

After riding across country, up hill and down, for a couple of hours,
we came upon a rough, little-used wood-road which ran generally in the
direction we were going, and taking this road we plodded on until about
two o’clock, when, happening to look back, I observed a cloud of dust,
in the midst of which was a horseman who appeared to be galloping to
overtake us. Our cavalcade came to a halt, and we watched the advancing
rider in silence until, much to our surprise, his near approach
disclosed the features of George Catlin, our late host.

“Well, boys,” said he, as he pulled up his smoking horse beside us,
“you didn’t expect to see me again quite so soon, did you? Phew! It’s
hot. We’re in for a thunder-storm directly. And a good thing, too:
it will cover up your tracks. Boys, I think there’s someone on your
trail,--someone you don’t want to meet.”

“What makes you think that, George?” asked Jack.

“Why,” replied the ranchman, “just before dinner two men came to the
house and asked a lot of questions about you: which way you had gone,
how long since you had started, whether you were alone, and so on.
They seemed to know a good deal about you, but they didn’t get much
additional information out of me, because, when I asked them what they
wanted to know for, they said that was their business; so I told them
that if they couldn’t answer a civil question they might get off the
ranch and conduct their business somewhere else--which they did; riding
off in the direction of Golconda.”

“But why should you think that we have any reason to be afraid of
them?” asked Percy. “What were they like?”

“One of them was a tall, dark-haired young fellow, English, I should
say, from his accent. The other was a squat, red-haired man with a
broken nose and a very remarkable voice. If he isn’t your train-wrecker
friend I’m much mistaken; and if he is, his asking after you bodes you
no good. He’s a bad one, if looks count for anything.”

This was disquieting news to Percy and me, for we had a lively dread of
the man with the squeaky voice. Instinctively we turned to our leader
for counsel.

“What are we to do, Jack?” I asked.

“Get off the road,” replied Jack, promptly. “And the sooner that
thunder-storm comes along the better, for our trail must be as plain as
daylight all the way. Is there a stream, George----?”

“Yes, right ahead. Let me go first, Jack; I know this country better
than you do; I’ve ridden all over it after cattle. You’d better lead
the mules.”

Soon we were strung out in line, and for half an hour we pegged along,
every now and then casting back an anxious glance to see which was
likely to overtake us first, Squeaky or the thunder-storm. Presently we
came to a shallow stream rippling merrily across the road, and having
advanced half-way across it, the ranchman turned short to the right
and proceeded to ride up its gravelly bed; the rest following behind
him. After splashing along in this manner for some distance, our guide
scrambled out at a point where the stony nature of the ground would
prevent the hoofs of the animals from leaving any trail, and thence
he conducted us to a secluded hollow between two hills, completely
concealed from the view of any traveller down upon the road.

“Now, Jack,” he began--and then stopped. “Hark!” he cried, holding up
his hand. “Do you hear that roaring noise? It’s hail. That will wipe
out your tracks. But we must get under the lee of this rocky ledge,
or it may stampede the stock. Here it comes!” as a blast of cold air
swept along the little valley. “Hurry up!”

We had hardly taken our positions under shelter of the rocks when the
light of the sun was suddenly cut off and the temperature went down, I
should think, fifty degrees in as many seconds; then came a rumble of
thunder; there was a _spat-spat_, as half-a-dozen big hailstones came
hopping along the hard ground; and then all at once, the storm seemed
to leap upon us, and for the next five minutes one could not hear
himself shout for the roaring of the thunder and the rattling of the
hail. The commotion ceased again as suddenly as it had begun; out came
the sun once more, and in another ten minutes the whole country was
steaming with the moisture of the melted hailstones.

“Now, Jack,” said the ranchman, continuing the speech he had begun when
interrupted by the storm, “what do you think of camping here? You have
made a very good distance for the first day’s march; this is a good
spot for a camp; and what I was thinking of mostly is that we can watch
the road from the top of this hill and see if that fellow goes by. What
do you think?”

We all agreed that this was a good idea, and accordingly, while we
three proceeded to unload the mules and make camp, George Catlin
ascended the hill with Jack’s field-glass in his hand, and lying down
among the rocks near the summit, kept watch upon the road, with little
danger of being seen himself. The grateful mules, relieved of their
burdens, were still rolling on their backs, kicking their heels in the
air, and grunting with satisfaction, when we observed that our sentinel
was making signs to us to come up the hill; we therefore hurried to his
side, when he informed us that he had caught sight of two men riding
along the road whom he believed to be the two who had called at the
ranch that morning.

“I shall know as soon as they come in sight again round that bend,”
said he.

After lying for a minute or two, peering through the glass, he backed
carefully down the hill a little way, and said in a low voice:

“Those are the men. Take a look at them, Jack. The one on the grey
horse is the man with the squeaky voice.”

Jack examined the men and handed the glass to Percy. No sooner had
the latter obtained the focus than he uttered an exclamation of
astonishment:

“Tom, Tom!” he ejaculated; “that other fellow, the one on the black
horse, is Bates!”

“Get out!” said I, incredulously, and seizing the glass I gazed long
and earnestly at the younger of the two riders.

It was Bates, sure enough.

Here was an astonishing thing. To us it was a fact absolutely
inexplicable that Bates, whom we had last seen peering through a hole
in the wall of Hengist’s Castle, should be down there, riding along a
disused road in the mountains of Utah, presumably looking for us. How
came he there? And why, of all people in the world, should he have
chosen that squeaky-voiced reprobate as his companion? There was no
telling. We were completely at sea.

It was evident that our tracks had been obliterated, for as we watched
them the riders splashed across the creek and continued on their way
at the same pace, quite unsuspicious of the fact that the farther
they went the farther they were leaving us behind. Presently they
disappeared again from our view, when, leaving the hilltop, we returned
to the camping-place and resumed our preparations for the night.

It was not until darkness settled down that we ventured to light a
fire, fearing that the smoke might betray our whereabouts, and it was
pretty late that night ere we retired to our beds upon the bare ground
after a prolonged and entirely unsatisfying discussion of the subject
of Bates’s mysterious appearance and of his and his companion’s object
in seeking for us.

Percy and I felt rather stiff and extremely sleepy when Jack aroused
us next morning while yet the stars were shining, and prodigious were
the yawns with which we greeted our companions and each other. A hot
and plentiful breakfast, however, soon put us to rights, and as soon
as it was despatched Jack and the ranchman set to work packing the
mules, while we two subordinates looked to the saddling of the horses.
Everything being ready, we climbed into the saddles, and bidding a
final adieu to our good friend, George, we set out over the hills on
our second day’s march, just as the first reddening of the eastern sky
proclaimed that the punctual sun was preparing to get up for his day’s
work.

As a matter of precaution Jack rode about half a mile ahead, in order
that he might signal us to get away and hide in case we should come
suddenly upon Bates and his companion; though, had those gentlemen been
awake and within hearing at the moment, they would undoubtedly have
discovered our presence at once, for as Jack galloped off to take up
his position in advance, our two mules raised a hideous cry, thinking
that their dear friend, Toby, was about to desert them. It is curious
how, in a small party like ours, one horse will usually assume the
position of “boss”; the others, and especially the mules, looking to
him for guidance, and feeling uneasy whenever he is out of sight.

We had been riding in this order for about an hour, when Jack, who had
just reached the brow of a gentle hill, suddenly wheeled around and
came galloping back, waving his hand to us to draw off to one side
behind some willows.

“There’s a camp-fire down the valley to the left,” said he,
dismounting, “and I saw two horses tethered there. I noticed that the
fire is built near a great pile of loose rocks, and I believe I can
crawl up close to it without being discovered, and if I can do so I may
be able to hear what they are after, and what they intend to do next. I
think it is worth trying, don’t you?”

“Let me go instead, Jack,” said Percy. “I should like to get up close
to them so that I may make sure it _is_ Bates. I only half believe it
yet.”

[Illustration: “HE LOOKED DOWN UPON THE TWO UNSUSPECTING CAMPERS.”]

“All right,” replied Jack. “You shall crawl up to their camp, and I’ll
stand guard a little way behind you. Tom shall stay here and take care
of the horses.”

This arrangement was followed out. The animals were driven in among the
willows, and I, who stayed to look after them, watched my companions as
they went dodging and stooping around the end of the hill, until they
disappeared from sight.

Percy, leaving Jack behind him to act as a guard, crawled cautiously
toward the little column of smoke until he had come within ten feet of
it, and then, lying flat between two big stones, his face concealed
by the long grass, he looked down upon the two unsuspecting campers,
who were sitting on either side of the fire cooking scraps of bacon
on sticks. One of them was Bates; there was no question of that. The
other, too, disclosed his identity the moment he spoke; it was, without
doubt, the squeaky-voiced train-wrecker.

Percy could not repress a tremor when he found himself once more so
close to that precious rascal.

“What did I leave Nebraska for?” Squeaky was saying. “Well, Nebraska
was getting unhealthy for me, and I thought I’d try a change of
climate. I was too much sought after there, and that’s a fact. But what
sent you out here? _You_ didn’t have to leave between two days, did
you?”

“No,” replied Bates. “I’m travelling for pleasure, you see,--at least,
I was,--and I ought to be well on my way to California now, but,
unfortunately, I tried my luck in a gambling hall one evening and lost
nearly everything I had. I never saw such a streak of bad luck.”

The red-headed man nodded. “I know all about that,” said he. “I was
standing behind you when you lost your money, and I guessed by your
actions that you was pretty well cleaned out. That’s what made me
speak to you, and propose we should work some scheme together to make
a raise. I knew that when a man loses all his money gambling he’s
generally ready to go into any kind of a scheme, no matter what, to get
a fresh supply, and when you told me about these two runaway schoolboys
I saw a chance to do it. How did you come to know about ’em, anyway?”

“I was at school with them,” replied Bates. “They got in to a poaching
scrape and ran away. The next thing I heard of them was finding
their names in the paper as having prevented the wrecking of a train
somewhere in Nebraska.”

“What!” exclaimed the other. “Was it them?”

Bates nodded; and Squeaky’s face assumed a very ugly expression as he
continued:

“Then that’s another reason for getting my hands on them. They owe me
something, and if ever I get hold of them they’ll have to pay.”

“Why? What do you mean? What have you to do with that business?”

“What have I--well, never mind that now. I’ll explain later, maybe. So
that’s the pair, is it?”--and he went on mumbling to himself, with his
mouth full of bacon.

“Look here, Morgan,” said Bates, presently. “This plan of yours” (Percy
wondered what the plan might be) “is all very fine and ingenious; but
before we can put it into practice we’ve got to find the boys; not such
an easy thing, it seems to me, in this wide-open country.”

“You’re right enough there,” replied Squeaky. “But if we don’t run
across them accidentally I know a way of catching them, sure.”

“How’s that?” inquired Bates.

“We know they’re bound for Montana, don’t we? Found that out in
Golconda. Just now they may be before us, or behind us, or on either
side of us, and if we waste time prospecting around this neighbourhood
after them they may get clean away from us. Now, as far as I’m
concerned, I’d just as soon go to Montana as anywhere else,--I’ve been
there before, and I know the country,--and my scheme is to go straight
ahead and ride along the stage-road until we come to the Snake River
bridge, and if they haven’t gone by, to sit down there and wait for
them. If they want to get to Montana they’ve got to cross the Snake,
and if they cross the Snake they’ve got to go by the bridge; it’s
too dangerous fording the river at this time of year when the snow
is melting in the mountains. She’s a pretty fierce old river, is the
Snake.”

“But,” Bates objected once more, “supposing they don’t come to the
bridge at all. Supposing they do manage to get across the river
somehow. What are we going to do then? The money I have left won’t last
very long.”

“We’ll wait for them at the bridge a week,” replied Squeaky, “and if
they don’t come we’ll go on to Montana. As to the money, there’s ways
of making money. There’s the cards. I know all the tricks in that line,
and I can teach you. Then there’s mining-deals,--that’s a good notion.
That’s got to be thought about. Here’s you, a rich young Englishman,
looking for an investment; and here’s me, the honest miner--yes,
that’s got to be thought about. Then there’s stage-coaches to be held
up,--that’s a bit risky; and so is running off horses. But a man must
live, and if we’ve got to do it, we’ve got to, and that’s all there is
about it.”

It did not seem to occur to this honest citizen, or to Bates either,
for that matter, that there was yet another way of getting money,--by
working for it.

By this time the pair had finished their breakfast, and having
collected their few belongings they saddled up--Percy making himself as
flat as possible during the operation--and rode away.

As soon as they were safely out of sight, our scout rose to his feet
and walked back to where Jack was stationed, and together they returned
to the spot where I stood impatiently awaiting them.

“Well,” said our captain, when he had heard Percy’s report, “your
friend Bates seems to have gotten into nice company. That is a smart
fellow, that squeaky-voiced scoundrel; he guessed our plans pretty
well. My original intention was to ride up the stage-road from Corinne
to the town of Bozeman, in Montana; but now that we know their scheme
we’ll just make a change in our own plan. They will wait for us a long
time before they catch us at the bridge; we won’t go near it; we’ll
go straight northward across country, leaving the road well away to
our left. That fellow is right in saying that the Snake is a difficult
river to cross; but we’ll find a way over somehow, never fear, even if
we have to go up-stream until we get around its little end. By taking
this course we shall give them the slip altogether; they will have no
means of knowing what has become of us. All the same,” Jack added,
impressively, “it will be well to keep our eyes open. Mr. Morgan, I
suspect, would not stick at shooting any or all of us if it suited his
purpose to do so. So, remember,--if you meet a short, square-built,
red-haired man, with a broken nose, cock your rifle, and don’t let him
get behind you. All aboard!”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VII

INTO THE WILDERNESS


For several days we marched steadily northward over a rolling country,
camping at first upon streams which flowed south-westward to the Great
Salt Lake, and latterly upon others which took a northerly course to
join the turbulent Snake, the great southern branch of the Columbia.
During this time, Percy and I, by systematic practice, became fairly
expert in the art of packing; Percy, too, having developed unsuspected
gifts as a cook, was unanimously elected to fill that responsible
position, while I, having no genius for anything in particular, was
allotted the more humble office of dish-washer.

Whenever occasion permitted--while Percy was cooking and Jack chopping
wood, perhaps--I would take the little single-barrelled shotgun and
wander up the stream to try for some ducks, or over the hills in the
hope of stirring up a jack-rabbit or a sage-hen. Many a supper did
Ulysses and I and the shotgun procure between us; but as yet we had had
little use for our rifles; excepting one antelope which Percy and I had
blazed at and missed, we had seen no large game, unless the occasional
wolf and the frequent coyote be counted as such.

What astute vagabonds are those coyotes, the street-arabs of the
wilderness, their wits sharpened by the unceasing competition for
a livelihood with their hungry relations, and with all the other
carnivorous beasts of the field,--to say nothing of several of the
birds of the air! With what persistency would they sit around our
camp-fire at night and serenade us with their doleful howlings, and how
silently would they glide away into the darkness when the indignant
Ulysses rushed forth to devour them!

Ulysses, having been brought up in a town, was as yet unacquainted with
the wiles of those “subterfugious beasts,” as Percy called them, and
great store of breath and energy did he expend in frantic efforts to
catch one, until, learning by experience the futility of such a course,
he contented himself with bestowing upon them a contemptuous glance
when they trotted across our path, and, at a distance of twenty yards,
impudently stood still to watch us go by.

The coyote is generally spoken of with disrespect as a cowardly,
sneaking outcast, a lean and draggle-tailed caricature of his big
cousin, the wolf. But, for my part, I confess I rather like him.
His big ears, and his sharp, inquisitive nose, make him the most
wide-awake-looking animal I know; while, as for activity, not even the
antelope is more light-footed. His valour, I admit, is leavened by a
large measure of discretion. He will run away, as a rule, from any dog
that is more than half as big as himself. But get him into a corner
where he has no chance to run farther, and it will be a bold dog that
will venture within range of his snapping jaws.

That the coyote possesses good reasoning powers no one who is familiar
with him will deny. He is aware, for instance, of the custom of the
jack-rabbit to run in a circle when pursued, and on one occasion
I saw him take advantage of that knowledge, to the disgust of our
honest friend Ulysses. We were encamped on an open plain, and Ulysses,
going off on a private hunt, put up a “jack,” which he pursued with
vociferous impetuosity. As I stood watching the chase, I observed a
coyote come running toward the spot and take up a position on a little
hillock, where he sat down to watch also. The rabbit, as usual, made a
large circuit, and as he came back to the starting-point, with Ulysses,
breathless but still hopeful, a hundred yards behind, the coyote rushed
down from his perch, snapped up the rabbit, and ran off with it,
leaving Ulysses seated on the ground, his long, red tongue hanging out,
thinking--I have no doubt--uncomplimentary thoughts of the thieving
vagrant who had defrauded him of his dinner.

It was about the end of the second week of our journey that we came
suddenly upon a swift, muddy river running in a rocky channel sunk deep
below the level of the plain--the Snake.

Although it was yet early in the afternoon, we went into camp at once
in a fine grove of cottonwoods and willows fringing the banks of a
little branch stream which there ran down to the river, and here Jack,
taking from his pocket a large map, spread it upon the ground and
issued a summons for an immediate council of war.

“Now, you fellows,” said he, as we got sat cross-legged before the map,
“we have got to get to the other side of this river somehow or go home
again. There are three ways of doing it: by fording, by rafting, or by
going a long way down-stream to the bridge marked here. The last is out
of the question, for our friend Squeaky is probably waiting there for
us now. I think that if we can’t find a ford in a couple of days we had
better build a little raft at some point where the river is not too
swift, ferry our things across, and make the horses and mules swim. I
have no doubt we might find a ford if we were to follow up the stream
far enough, but you see the country is very little known up in that
direction, for most of the branch streams are marked with dotted lines,
showing that they are unexplored. So I think a raft-- Hallo! Ulysses.
What’s the matter with you?”

Ulysses, who had been peacefully snoozing in the shade, at this moment
sprang to his feet and began to growl, sniffing the breeze which blew
up the river. Jack rose and looked in that direction through the tops
of the willows, but hardly had he straightened up ere he ducked down
again, and whispered:

“Horsemen. Riding on the other side of the river about a mile off.
Coming this way. Get your rifles.”

At some remote period in the earth’s history there had occurred in this
neighbourhood a great volcanic eruption, covering the wide-spreading
plain with a thick bed of lava. Into this lava-bed the strong,
ceaseless flow of the river had cut a channel some fifteen to twenty
feet deep, in the perpendicular walls of which there was no apparent
break except at the point where the little stream upon which we were
encamped ran down to the river. From where we stood we could see a
long way down-stream, and with much anxiety we watched the approaching
riders. Was Squeaky there? That was the question that troubled us. Had
he somehow got wind of our movements, and had he abandoned his post at
the bridge below in order to seek for our trail up the river?

“I can’t make them out,” said Jack, who was gazing at them intently
through the glass. “The sun is just behind them----”

As he spoke the cavalcade suddenly vanished as though the earth had
swallowed it up; but in another minute it reappeared in the river.
There was evidently a break in the wall which we could not see.

“It’s all right,” exclaimed Jack, as soon as he got sight of them
against the dark background of the rocks. “The first is a white man,
then comes a pack-horse, then two little boys on one pony, bareback,
then another pack-horse, and the last is an Indian; a squaw, I expect,
from her size.”

“Well, that’s a comfort,” said Percy, in a tone of much relief; a
sentiment in which we all emphatically coincided.

“What are they going to do?” I asked presently. “What are they riding
up the river like that for?” For they were splashing along up-stream
close under the opposite bank.

“There’s a ford here somewhere,” replied Jack, “and it must come out at
this point; there’s no other place. They know what they are about, you
may be sure. That man is an old trapper, I expect.”

The party kept on up-stream until they were nearly opposite the mouth
of our little creek, and then the leader, turning short to his right,
headed his horse across the river, the rest following. The horses
understood their business, evidently; they came slowly across, walking
sideways or nearly so, with their heads up-stream; the water, which
was very swift, being almost half-way up their bodies. It looked
dangerous, especially for the little boys, who, should their horse
stumble, would almost certainly be swept away and drowned.

The man was within twenty feet of the bank when the very thing we had
been half expecting happened. The boys’ horse stepped into a hole, fell
upon his knees, and was rolled over in a trice. The smaller boy was
instantly whisked away; but the elder, having the reins in his hands,
held on to them. At the cry of the children the man looked back, and
promptly swung his horse round to go to their assistance; but seeing
that the elder boy still had hold of the bridle, that the horse had
regained his feet and was standing steady with his legs wide apart,
and seeing also that the woman was making all possible haste to the
rescue, he turned back again and came splashing towards the bank, with
the intention of galloping down-stream and “heading off” the other boy,
who, small though he was, was swimming along like a cork.

The very instant that this catastrophe happened Jack burst out of the
willows and ran down towards the river, but Percy, having caught a
glimpse of the small boy’s head bobbing along down-stream, grabbed up a
long picket-rope which fortunately lay near at hand, and calling to me
to follow, set off as hard as he could run down the bank.

Having caught up with and passed the boy, who, with the stoicism of his
half-Indian nature, was all this time swimming along without making
a sound, Percy flung the coil of rope to me with a “Hold on to that,
Tom,” seized the end between his teeth, scrambled down the rocks, waded
out as far as possible, and then, throwing himself forward, struck out
for mid-stream. As the little brown-faced youngster came sweeping by,
Percy grasped him by the shirt between the shoulder-blades, gripped the
rope with his left hand, and called to me to haul in.

It was all very well to say “Haul in”; the best I could do, sitting
with my feet braced against the rocks, was to avoid being hauled in
myself, the current was so strong. The moment the rope tightened, down
went Percy and the boy under the water, reappearing directly with much
spluttering and gasping; and then for the first time the little shaver
began to cry and struggle. At the same moment there was a rush of
footsteps, and Jack was down in the water pulling on the rope, which,
between us, we drew in hand over hand. Percy and the boy were almost
within reach when I heard a clatter of hoofs behind me, and a tall man
threw himself from his horse, half climbed and half tumbled down the
rocks, waded into the river, and seized the boy by the shoulder and
Percy by the wrist; none too soon, either, for Percy’s arm was almost
pulled out at the socket.

Two minutes more, and we were all high and dry on the bank again,
shaking hands with each other, and praising the little whimpering
youngster for being so brave. The whole thing, I believe, occupied
hardly five minutes.

The tall stranger, who stood there still holding his shivering little
son in his arms, was evidently a man of few words, one of the silent
kind who have neither the gift nor the habit of expressing their
feelings in flowing language. Setting the boy upon the ground and
telling him to “cut along” to his mother, he extended his hand again to
Percy and said, “You did that mighty well,--mighty well. I am ever so
much beholden to you. Come on. Let’s get back to camp.”

The Indian woman had already lighted a fire, and the two little
brown-bodied rascals, stripped of their clothing, were running about
quite happy, not a whit the worse for their ducking. While the squaw
unpacked and unsaddled the horses, which she set about doing as though
it were her regular duty (as no doubt it was), the man came over to
the roaring camp-fire I had started, and with Percy and Jack took up a
position before it, where he and they were soon steaming away like so
many geysers.

“Hunting?” asked our laconic new acquaintance.

“Yes,” replied Jack, with equal brevity.

“Going across the river?”

“Yes; going up to Montana. How’s grass and water and game?”

“First rate. Going up the Henry?”

“Well, I don’t know for certain. I thought of following along the
foothills of the Teton range, and doing a little prospecting. Do you
know the country?”

“Mighty well, some of it. I’ve hunted around here the last five years.
My name’s Jim Perkins; folks call me Tracker Jim.”

“Oh, then, I’ve heard of you,” exclaimed Jack. “Wasn’t it you who held
a pass some years ago against a band of Blackfeet, somewhere up beyond
the Gallatin valley?”

The man nodded.

“Won’t you tell us about it?” asked Percy, turning round to roast the
other side of his person.

“Why, there ain’t much to tell. About a dozen young bucks went off on
the rampage, and as some of the settlers was in danger I went to warn
them. There was five women and half-a-dozen children and only three
men, and the Blackfeet caught up with us just as we were coming out
at the top end of a narrow cañon, so I stayed behind to stand ’em off
while the rest cleared out.”

“Well?” said Percy, inquiringly; for Mr. Tracker Jim seemed disposed to
stop there.

“Well, I got behind a rock, and we had a lively time for a spell, them
shooting at me and me shooting at them. The walls of the cañon was too
steep for ’em to climb up and get behind me, but one of ’em climbed up
part way, where he could get a sight of me, and a mighty good shot he
was, considering what an awkward standing-place he had; the bullets
kept a-pecking up the ground all around me as I lay flat behind my
boulder; and whenever I tried to shoot back at him, all the others
would blaze away at me.”

“Weren’t you frightened?” I asked, regarding him with the greatest
interest.

“Scared blue,” replied the modest hero. “But I stood ’em off till
dark, and then a party of cowboys come along and toted me out o’ there.
After that I left that part of the country and come down here.”

“You were wounded, weren’t you?” inquired Jack.

“Why, yes. I had my left hand broke, and I was hit in five other
places; but you see they didn’t know that, or they’d’a’ rushed the
place, and then I’d’a’ bin a goner.”

The man told this brief tale in the quietest and most matter-of-fact
way. He did not look for applause; he merely mentioned the matter
because he had been asked to do so; and as to regarding himself as a
hero, such an idea, seemingly, had never occurred to him.

As Jack said, in talking of him afterwards, there are two classes of
frontiersmen: one whose members brag and talk and “swell around,” and
do nothing, performing their deeds of heroism by word of mouth in the
bar-rooms of the settlements; the other composed of those men who _do_
things and _say_ nothing--men whose deeds, courageous almost past the
understanding of ordinary stay-at-home folks, are the beginning and the
foundation of the stirring history of the Great West.

Our friend standing there by the fire was one of the latter; though no
one suspected it less than he.

“Is there any danger from Indians between here and Bozeman?” asked Jack
presently--a question of great moment to us, for it had been mutually
agreed between us that we had no right to take any risk so serious
as an encounter with Indians, and should our new friend reply in the
affirmative we felt that our duty to our parents, to say nothing of
our solicitude for our own safety, would compel us to hark back to the
stage-road,--Squeaky or no Squeaky,--or even to abandon our expedition
altogether. Tracker Jim therefore lifted a great weight from our minds
when, in response to Jack’s inquiry, he said:

“No; not the way you intend to go, between the Tetons and the Henry
River; especially so early in the year as this.”

“Can you give us any advice as to the best course?” Jack continued.

“Well, in a general way, all you’ve got to do is to keep the Tetons on
your right and the Henry on your left until you come to the head-waters
of the river. I’ve heard say it heads in a lake, but I never was up
that far. Then you’ll have to bear a little to your left until you
strike Bozeman or Virginia City or the stage-road. It’s simple enough.
After you’ve crossed the Snake, here, you can head straight for the
Grand Teton if you want to. If you’re hunting scenery as well as game
it’s worth going out of your way to see; it’s the finest mountain in
America that I know of.”

“I think we may as well do that,” replied Jack. “Eh, you fellows? Time
and place are no very particular objects with us.”

To this proposition we assented; and just then I observed that the
Indian woman was making signs to Tracker Jim.

“The woman says supper’s ready,” he remarked. “Come on, if you’re dried
out enough.”

Gladly accepting this invitation, we marched over to the other camp,
armed with our own tin plates and cups; being received by the silent
Indian woman with a broad smile. A very noble supper we had that night.
Two courses,--soup and meat. Uncommonly good that soup was too. It
was made of the tail of a beaver; the second course consisting of the
beaver itself, baked before being cleaned,--a fact we did not discover
till afterwards; which was just as well, perhaps.

Our new friend having volunteered to show us the way across the
dangerous ford, we followed him next morning into the river and shortly
found ourselves standing in safety upon its northern bank, where, with
mutual good wishes, we took leave of Tracker Jim, and turning our faces
toward the east plunged into the unknown wilderness; highly delighted
at the thought of how we had circumvented Squeaky, who, we had no
doubt, was at that moment impatiently awaiting our appearance at the
bridge below.

We had not long passed the Snake ere we discovered that we had
come into a country very different from that we had hitherto been
traversing. For one thing, game of all sorts became abundant. One
could not ascend a hill without seeing at least one band of antelope,
and more often three or four; while, as we approached the mountains,
black-tail and white-tail deer began to make their appearance, elk
were occasionally seen, and now and then a bear. These last, by mutual
consent, we very carefully left alone; we decided that we had no right
to take any risks with them.

With all this game to practise on, Percy and I soon became fairly
expert hunters, and it was not long ere Jack abandoned to us entirely
the fascinating duty of supplying the camp with meat.

Another particular in which the passage of the Snake had produced a
great change was in the nature of the country itself. In place of the
long stretches of barren sand we found rolling hills covered with
luxuriant grass, intersected by deep cañons which sometimes forced us
to go several miles out of our course in search of a crossing-place.

We discovered also that as a guide our map was now practically useless.
Such features of the country as the mountains of the Teton range,
the most conspicuous objects within a circle of a hundred miles, or
a great river like the Snake, were set down with some pretentions to
accuracy, but otherwise our speculative map-maker had committed sins
both of omission and commission. He had decorated his map with streams
and mountains which did not exist, while a trifling feature such as
the Teton Basin, a district containing some eight hundred square miles
of the finest grass-land, he appeared to think unworthy of notice; at
any rate he had neither named nor indicated it upon his map. Evidently
this important basin, though well known to trappers and hunters, was
a _terra incognita_ to the world in general and to our geographer in
particular.

But it was little we cared about that. We were not afraid of losing
ourselves. We could not well cross the Teton range to the east
without being aware of it, while we knew that by turning westward and
continuing in that direction for an indefinite number of miles we
should eventually come first upon the Henry River and later upon the
stage-road. In fact, the unreliability of our map rather added zest
to our enterprise; it proved, to our satisfaction at least, that we
might with justice lay claim to the proud titles of “Pioneers of the
Wilderness,” “Explorers of the Great West.” So strong, indeed, was this
feeling of self-complacency, that, as we rode along in the glorious
sunshine, with the peak of the Teton straight in front of us, Percy
burst forth singing _Hail Columbia_ with great gusto. He was obliged
to desist, however, after the first verse, for Calliope insisted upon
joining in, with disastrous results. Calliope might be a good singer
(for a mule), but it must be confessed she had one fatal fault: she
would _not_ pay attention to the time or the tune; a defect which is
ruinous to the proper rendering of a concerted piece.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VIII

A QUEER COUNTRY


An eastward ride of several days carried us to the neighbourhood of
the Grand Teton, a splendid mountain, whose height, isolation, and
conspicuous outline have made it a landmark and guide to the trapper
and the explorer ever since the days when Lewis and Clark first
struggled across the continent; and thence, diverging to the left, we
took a northward course along the foothills.

Our progress through this thickly timbered country was extremely slow,
for we felt it necessary to test for gold every one of the numberless
little streams which cut across our path, sometimes making a stop of
two or three days for the purpose.

A common obstacle to a rapid advance, too, was the frequent occurrence
of swamps,--the work of the beavers. The cleverness of these little
engineers is matter for admiration, but the result of their labours
is apt to be annoying to the traveller. They would build a dam across
a stream, backing up the water until it overflowed its banks on either
side; then they would go a little farther up-stream and build another,
and another, and another, until the valley for several miles of its
length would be converted into an impassable morass.

These oft-recurring impediments, as I have said, rendered our
northward progress very slow. At length, however, sometime early in
August as we supposed--for we had but a very indefinite idea of the
progress of time--we were forced out of our course by a great series
of beaver-dams, and going a long way to the left in the attempt to
circumvent them, we came upon a good-sized river flowing swiftly toward
the south. On consulting our map we decided that this must be the
Henry, or North Fork of the Snake; but our map-maker, though he had
knowledge of the existence of such a stream, evidently did not know
many particulars concerning it, for he failed altogether to take notice
of the fact that it had its source in a beautiful lake, upon whose
shore we unexpectedly found ourselves one day. It was the lake that our
friend Tracker Jim had mentioned.

By this time Percy and I had begun to understand what was meant by the
name “Rocky Mountains.” Previously, I, at least, had taken my idea of
this great “system” from the maps in common use in English schools,
where the backbone of the continent was represented by an object which
might be taken for a long, hairy caterpillar crawling up from Mexico to
the Arctic Ocean; sometimes with little caterpillars crawling beside
it. It had never occurred to me (or to Percy either, I believe) that
one might travel from east to west for seven hundred miles or more and
be surrounded by mountains all the way. In common with most schoolboys
(begging their pardons if I do them an injustice) I vaguely supposed
that I should find a long string of peaks, rough and sharp-pointed like
the Grand Teton, with depressions between them, over which one might
climb with difficulty; but that anybody could pass over the main range
of the Rocky Mountains and not know it, would have seemed to me too
absurd to be thought of for a moment. Nevertheless, that is precisely
what we did, impossible as it may seem.

Leaving the lake on our left hands, we rode up a gentle acclivity and
down the other side,--as we had done a hundred times before,--and
presently found ourselves on the bank of a fine creek running toward
the north. Without suspecting it, we had passed from the Pacific to the
Atlantic side of the great continental watershed; we were standing by
a stream which was flowing to join the Missouri, a tributary of that
mighty river upon whose bank we had stepped from an ocean-going vessel
so many weeks before.

It may appear strange that none of us should have had any inkling of
the truth, but, as to Percy and me, how were we to guess that the great
river upon whose left bank we had landed when coming from the east
should have any connection with a stream upon whose left bank, again,
we found ourselves when coming from the south-west? We did not take
into account the immense bend that the Missouri makes before it enters
upon its southerly course.

Even Jack, with his greater knowledge and his far greater experience,
was deceived by the ease with which we had traversed the pass. He did,
indeed, express some surprise at finding so large a stream on the other
side, and wondered if, and how, it found its way into the lake we had
just left, but he was as far as ourselves from suspecting that he had
crossed the main range.

“Well,” said he, as we stopped to let the horses drink, “I’m rather
puzzled which way to go: up, down, or across this stream. The country
to the right looks most promising for a gold-hunter, but we shall be
getting a pretty long way from the settlements in Montana if we go in
that direction; besides which Tracker Jim told us that we must bear to
the left after passing the lake. What do you think about it?”

“We have a fair supply of flour and sugar left,” said Percy; “so, as
far as provisions are concerned, there is no need of going near any
settlement at present. I should be inclined to say ‘up.’”

“So should I,” was my contribution to the debate. “The country in front
of us does not look very promising, and as gold-hunting is the main
object of this excursion I think we should go where we are most likely
to find it,--which seems to me to be up-stream; so I say ‘up’ too.”

“Suppose we go into camp at once,” said Jack. “And then we can talk it
over after supper. Here’s a pretty good place for camp, now, in the
shelter of this clump of pines.”

As we rode round the end of the group of trees in order to get upon its
leeward side, I caught sight at a great distance of a long string of
animals walking in procession across the valley.

“Jack!” I cried. “Look! What are those?”

Jack’s glass was out in an instant.

“Elk,” said he. “A whole band of them. There must be fifty. Tom, will
you make camp by yourself? Percy and I will go after them at once.”

Accordingly away they rode; while I unpacked the mules--tethering them
to prevent their running off in pursuit of Toby--and made preparations
for the night. This occupied me for about an hour, and then, taking
the shotgun, I wandered off up the pine-clad spur of the mountain to
see if I could get a few grouse. These birds were very plentiful, and,
either from natural foolishness or because they had not yet learned
from experience how destructive an animal is man, they were very easy
to shoot. On being disturbed they would fly up into the nearest tree,
and one might shoot three or four of them before it would occur to the
survivors that it might be dangerous to remain there.

On this particular occasion, however, my hunt for grouse came to
nothing. I was about to walk across a little open space in the woods,
when, from among the trees on the opposite side, about thirty steps
away, there suddenly appeared two little woolly animals which, though
I had never seen such a thing before, I knew must be young bears.
They were evidently out for a spree. They chased each other over the
grass; bit, buffeted, and tumbled over each other, growling all the
time with a great show of ferocity. I was so interested in watching
them that I forgot for the moment the fact that the old bear must be
somewhere close by. As soon as that thought did occur to me, however, I
prepared to slip away, but just as I was about to do so the gambols of
the little bears brought them over to my side of the open space, when,
catching sight of me, they stopped, and, with their heads cocked on one
side, stood thoughtfully staring me out of countenance. As I remained
perfectly still they gained courage to advance near enough to sniff
at my ankles, and finding that nothing alarming followed this act of
temerity they next proceeded to worry the legs of my overalls, just as
two young puppies would do. It was great fun for them, and it would
have been great fun for me, too, had it not been for my fear that the
old bear might come and spoil it all.

I had about decided that it would be an act of wisdom on my part
to kick the little bears and send them off home, when, happening
to look across the open, I saw something which sent my heart into
my mouth,--her Ladyship had arrived. From her great size and her
grey colour I guessed she must be a grizzly, and remembering with
thankfulness that the grizzly is no climber, I cast my eyes from side
to side in search of a tree to ascend, the one which sheltered me
being too big. Fortunately I was not reduced to this necessity. The
old bear, as soon as she saw where her cubs were, uttered a sound
which was evidently a note of recall, for the young ones at once
ceased to worry my trousers, and ran across to her. The old lady did
not appear to be in the best of tempers, for she saluted each of her
children with a cuff on the side of the head which sent him rolling
over and over,--it seemed to me to be hard enough to knock their heads
off altogether,--and turning about, walked off; my two little friends
following demurely behind.

As for myself, as soon as they were out of sight, I departed from the
neighbourhood with undignified celerity.

Coming down to the camp again, I was surprised to observe that Ulysses,
who had been left in charge, was standing guard over the baggage with
his bristles all erect, growling away to himself at a great rate. I
observed, too, that the mules were standing with their heads held high,
gazing intently in the direction of the pass we had traversed that
morning, though they could not see it on account of the intervening
strip of woods. Thinking that possibly another bear might be prowling
about, I ran down to the camp in order to exchange my shotgun for a
rifle, but as I was slipping a cartridge into the latter I paused
for an instant, for I had heard a sound I had not heard for a long
time,--the sound of a strange human voice.

Calling Ulysses to heel, I crept in among the trees and peered out on
the other side. There, coming down the pass, was a bunch of horses, and
behind them two men; the whole cavalcade looking very dusty and very
weary. They made their way straight to the river, where horses and men
at once proceeded to quench their thirst. While the horses were still
drinking the two men rose from their knees and began to talk; I could
hear them, but they were too far off for me to distinguish more than an
occasional word.

They appeared to be disputing. The shorter man gesticulated vigorously,
and pointing across the river to some high hills whose rocky tops
showed above the trees, he made some remark loudly enough for me to
catch the word “to-night.” The other, who leaned against his horse as
though he were extremely tired, appeared to be remonstrating; whereupon
his companion shouted at him:

“You young fool, do you want to be hung?”

It had seemed to me that there was something familiar in the voices,
but when the man shouted in that manner I knew in a moment who he was;
for at the word “fool,” his voice went off like a whistle-pipe.

As if to confirm my suspicion, one of the herd, more lively than the
rest, broke away, and came galloping in my direction, closely pursued
by the taller of the two men. When within about fifty yards of my
hiding-place it swerved round, and I then obtained a good sight of the
rider’s face. As I had supposed, it was Bates.

“So,” thought I, “you have gone into the horse-stealing business now,
have you, you unfortunate chap?”

All this time I had been on pins and needles lest our mules should
bray and thus betray my presence, and in consequence it was with very
sincere pleasure that I saw the party splash across the stream and make
off in the direction of the rocky hilltops; the men pausing to look
back toward the pass ere they plunged into the woods. In about half
an hour I caught sight of them again, crossing an open space upon the
hillside, and again I observed that they paused to look back. Evidently
they were in fear of pursuit.

Our hunters presently returning to camp, I at once related to them the
event of the afternoon.

“Well, that settles the question for us,” said Jack. “As they have gone
off toward the left, we will go off toward the right,--up-stream. They
won’t interfere any more with us, I expect, for it is pretty plain that
they have given up looking for us, and have taken to horse-stealing
as the next best thing to boy-stealing. All they are thinking of just
now is to make their way to some place where they can dispose of the
horses before they are overtaken. We might even follow in their tracks
with safety, for if they saw us coming, they would probably run away
from us. On the other hand, as we are only three, they might ambuscade
us,--which would not be pleasant. And so, I think, the wisest thing we
can do will be to give them as wide a berth as possible by going off in
the opposite direction.”

“Decidedly,” said Percy. “The farther we keep away from them the
better.”

“That is what I think,” I chimed in. “Let us give them all the start
they like; I don’t want to catch up with them. Up-stream for me.”

“And me,” echoed Percy. “Do you suppose, Jack,” he went on, “that if
they were caught they would be hung?”

“Undoubtedly,” replied Jack; “unless they were shot first.”

“Poor old Bates,” said Percy, reflectively. “To think that the trick he
played upon us, which made us run away for fear of being hung, should
have worked round so that now he is running away for the same reason.
Upon my word I’m sorry for him.”

But however sorry we might be for Bates, we were none the less
determined to avoid his company, at least as long as he should choose
to consort with his present ally, and accordingly we set off next
morning up the stream, following along its left bank until we arrived
at the point where its feeders became small and rapid. Passing from one
to the other of these little creeks, and working always towards the
left, we tested each one as we came to it; always without success, but
always hopeful for better fortune next time. Under Jack’s supervision
we two novices had taken many lessons in the art of gold-washing,--or,
rather, in the art of washing for gold,--and we were now fairly expert
in manipulating the pan, but however expert we might be our labour
produced nothing; either the country was barren of the precious metal,
or we had not found the right places. It was very disappointing,--to
Jack especially,--but the hopefulness of youth was on our side, and
every failure only determined us the more to persevere.

On one of these occasions of our moving camp from one creek to the next
we found that the distance between creeks was much greater than we had
expected, and as a consequence the darkness overtook us before we could
find a suitable camping-ground. Emerging at length from the woods
upon a little grassy plateau which would serve our purpose, we quickly
unpacked and turned loose the animals, which, having first enjoyed
their preliminary roll, walked off according to custom to take a drink
from the creek. To our surprise, they did not seem to like the water;
they walked along the bank, tasting the stream in different places, and
snorting in a dissatisfied manner. Going over to find out the reason,
we discovered that the water was strongly impregnated with iron and
sulphur. Presumably some mineral springs ran into it from up above
somewhere. However, the horses presently came to the conclusion that
they must drink there or go without, and having satisfied their thirst
they wandered off and soon were comfortably cropping the grass.

Meanwhile we had lighted a fire, and having cooked and eaten our supper
were thinking of going to bed, when the moon rose, and by its light we
noticed for the first time that the ground not far removed from where
we were was all covered with some white substance, presenting a very
strange appearance in the midst of the black woods.

“What is that?” I asked, shading my eyes from the glare of the fire,
and peering into the darkness. “It can’t be snow.”

“I should say it was egg-shells,” remarked Percy. “There’s an
uncommonly strong smell of bad eggs about here.”

“I don’t think your egg-shell theory will pass, Percy,” said
Jack, laughing; “the smell of bad eggs probably comes from some
sulphur-springs in the neighbourhood. I expect that white stuff is
deposit from the springs; though I never saw so much in one place
before. Let us go down that way and have a look.”

We had advanced some distance along the gloomy alley of trees, Ulysses
trotting behind, when Percy stopped, holding up his finger.

“Hark!” he exclaimed. “What is that sizzling noise?”

We stood still to listen. Sure enough there was a sizzling noise
going on somewhere near; a noise like the frying of a beefsteak. We
went poking forward in the dark with our noses near the ground, and
presently Jack, who was on the left, said:

“It’s just here, whatever it is. Have you a match, Tom?”

I struck a match and held it low down where the sound came from. To my
great surprise--for there was not a breath of air stirring--the match
was instantly blown out. I struck another. The same thing happened.

“That’s curious,” said Jack. “Wait a moment; I’ll go back to the fire
and bring a lighted stick.”

He had hardly spoken when a most astounding incident occurred. There
was a dull thud like the explosion of loose gunpowder; a shower of mud
bespattered us all over, and a cloud of steam puffed into our faces.

To say that we were frightened would be to put it altogether too
mildly. Ulysses, giving vent to a howl of dismay, clapped his tail
between his legs and disappeared into the woods; and as for us, we
staggered back, and stood for a moment trembling and speechless. One
does not, as a rule, care to confess having been afraid, but I own
with perfect readiness that I was on this occasion very much afraid,
and Jack and Percy I know will own as much. If anybody shall choose
to scoff at us he is welcome; but I should like to see the hero who
would preserve his equanimity under such circumstances. An unexpected
explosion at any time or in any place is a terrifying thing. How much
more terrifying must it be then in the darkness and silence of an
untrodden wilderness?

As Percy afterwards said, it was enough to scare anybody to have the
solid earth all of a sudden get up and fly at you like that.

As soon as we could collect our senses we ran back to the fire, and
there again we stood still for a short time gazing apprehensively into
the darkness; wondering what was to happen next, and what it was that
had happened already. Our captain was the first to recover the use of
his tongue.

“I wonder what that was,” said he. “I never was half so scared in my
life. It seems to be all quiet now. Shall we go back and look?”

It was not easy to screw up one’s courage to go near the place again,
but anything was better than uncertainty. Making, therefore, a couple
of torches, we walked back to the scene of the explosion.

For a space about fifteen feet square we found the turf all broken into
pieces and much of it turned upside down, while between the fragments
there issued a light cloud of steam. The turf itself was damp and warm.

“Well,” said Jack, “I expect no three fellows ever had such a
surprising thing happen to them before. I think I can account for it,
though. There must be a good many hot springs about here--there’s the
irony taste of that creek, and the white stuff down below, and the
smell of bad eggs--and I expect the steam from one of them has found
its way under the turf to this spot, and as soon as there was enough of
it it blew up.”

“That’s it, I’ve no doubt,” said I. “But look here, Jack; how are we to
know that it won’t blow up under our beds to-night? That would be worse
than this was.”

“I expect we are all right as far as that goes,” replied Jack. “You see
there was no sizzling noise about the camp, and the one we heard was
caused, I suppose, by the steam squeezing its way out from under the
turf. I don’t suppose such a thing happens once in a thousand years.”

“I hope it doesn’t,” Percy put in. “Two or three more of them would
turn my hair grey. Come. Let us go to bed. What’s become of old Lyss, I
wonder? Oh, there he is by the fire. Here, Lyss!”--whistling.

But Ulysses was not to be persuaded. He stood by the fire wagging his
tail when we called to him, but no blandishments could induce him again
to approach the place where he had been so nearly scared out of his
wits. Scientific explanations were wasted on him.

After sitting around the fire for some time, discussing this strange
phenomenon, we retired to bed, not feeling any too sure that we might
not be pitched out and parboiled before morning; and though nothing so
serious as this occurred, the night was not destined to pass without
disturbance. We had been asleep some time when Jack was awakened by
Ulysses’ whining and trying to crawl into his bed. This extraordinary
behaviour on the part of the usually discreet old dog naturally
disturbed Jack’s slumbers, and rousing himself to see what was the
cause of it, he heard a strange noise going on somewhere, which caused
him to call out:

“Tom! Percy! wake up!”

As we had gone to sleep with our nerves set with a hair-trigger we
awoke in a second, and, sitting up on our beds, listened.

From the valley below there came a mixed sound of thumping, roaring,
and splashing; and presently in the bright moonlight we saw a great
cloud, like a bolster five hundred feet high standing on end, go
sailing up the valley, soon to be followed by others, a dozen or two,
one behind the other.

It was a strange country indeed that we had come into.

Suddenly Jack startled us by clapping his hands together and shouting
out:

“I know! I know what’s the matter. We have crossed the range without
knowing it,--it must have been the day we left the lake,--and we have
wandered into the geyser basins of the Yellowstone region. That’s
what’s the matter.”

“Wandered where?” asked Percy and I together.

“Into the geyser region.”

“What’s that?”

“What! Haven’t you heard of the geysers of the Yellowstone that were
discovered a year or two ago?”

“No.”

“Well, then, go to sleep, my unsophisticated infants,” said Captain
Jack, with a patronising air, as he lay down again; “and if I’m not
mistaken you shall see to-morrow some of the most wonderful sights that
are to be found in all the wide world.”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER IX

SQUEAKY SCORES ONE


Jack was right, both in his conclusion that our crooked course had
carried us into the geyser basin and in his promise that we should see
marvellous things. Next morning began a week during which Percy and I
went about with our eyes so wide open with astonishment that I wonder
we ever managed to get them shut again.

Immediately after breakfast we walked to the edge of the pine-wood
and looked out over the little valley which lay below us. It was
an impressive and rather an awe-inspiring sight, even by daylight.
The valley was almost entirely covered by the white deposit I have
mentioned; whichever way one looked, up stream or down, he would see
jets and clouds of steam rising in the sharp morning air; while the
throbbing, rumbling, hissing noises going on all around gave one an
uncomfortable feeling that a great unknown power, which might break out
at any moment and from any point, was lying in wait somewhere below the
surface.

Near the head of the valley, not very far removed from where we stood,
was an extensive white mound, from which a puff of steam now and then
issued as if in warning that something was going to happen. Walking
over to this mound and ascending it by a series of natural steps, we
peered cautiously down the hole at the top. It was like looking down a
rough-walled well, coated with coloured plaster. There was a growling
and a grumbling going on down below, and presently, puff! came a great
ball of steam into our faces; we thought our eyebrows were gone. With
admirable unanimity we jumped back and retreated to a more respectful
distance.

Soon there was a great spasm, and a mass of hot water--tons of it--was
jerked out of the crater. Percy and I, with one impulse, turned to fly,
but Jack calling out, “It’s all right; it’s all right,” we stopped
again; standing, however, all ready to run at the shortest notice.

This casting out of hot water was but the preliminary to a regular
eruption. It was followed by volumes of steam which--like the
“bolsters” of the night before--were blown away by the wind; next, a
pillar of water about twenty feet high rose out of the orifice and
sank down again; and then the strange monster seemed to take a deep
breath, and a roaring column of water, five or six feet in diameter
and a hundred and fifty feet high, as we judged, was ejected from the
crater and stood erect, sometimes rising a little, sometimes falling a
little, for ten minutes. Gradually it subsided, sank down, stopped. The
exhibition was over.

None of us had said a word while this glorious display was in
progress,--we were too full of wonder and admiration for speech,--nor
did we, for a minute or two after it had ceased, break the silence. But
then, Percy, suddenly stretching out his hands, relieved his mind by
apostrophising our old enemy of Moseley’s school.

“Bates,” he exclaimed, “I forgive you! Bates, I’m much obliged to you!
If it hadn’t been for you, Bates, my boy, I should never have seen this
thing; and it’s worth--why, it’s worth a year in jail to have seen it.”

How we did chatter when once our tongues were loosened! We were
as proud of having come upon this wonderful region as if we had
discovered it ourselves.

It is a great temptation, and it would be very easy, to fill a
chapter or two with descriptions of the marvels we saw in this truly
astonishing country,--marvels at that time almost unknown to the
world,--the many great geysers, and the thousands of hot springs of
all sorts, sizes, and colours; but I refrain. It is enough to say that
for a week we three proud and happy explorers went about in a state of
chronic ecstasy and amazement; a state from which I, for one, expect
never entirely to recover.

Much as we should have liked to prolong our stay, we remembered that
ours was a business trip and not merely a sight-seeing excursion; we
had qualms of conscience, too, when we recalled how long it was since
we had been near a post-office; and accordingly, one morning, we packed
up our belongings and reluctantly rode away from the enchanted valley.

We had gone but a short distance when we were startled by the sound
of a jolly laugh issuing from the woods before us. With thoughts of
Squeaky in our minds we cocked our rifles and stood waiting anxiously
for whatever might turn up, when there rode into sight four horsemen,
the leader of whom looked so very much more respectable than we did
ourselves that our fears were at once allayed.

We expected the strangers to be as much surprised to see us as we were
to see them, but, strangely enough, they were not surprised at all.

“Good-morning, gentlemen,” said the leader, heartily. “I’m glad to see
you. Where’s the Doctor?”

“What doctor?” asked Jack, wondering.

“What doctor! Why, Doctor Hayden, of course. Don’t you belong to his
party?”

“No sir,” replied Jack. “We don’t belong to any party. We are just
travelling by ourselves.”

“Indeed!” said the gentleman, eying us as though he thought we were
rather young to be doing anything of the sort. “I supposed you belonged
to Doctor Hayden’s branch of the Geological Survey, which is coming
up from Bozeman; we are expecting them any day. Which way are you
travelling?”

“Why, we are not very particular, sir,” replied Jack, “but we want to
get down to Bozeman pretty soon, that’s all. Can you tell us which is
the best way?”

“You may follow down the Firehole, here,” responded the stranger,
“or you may cut across country in that direction”--pointing
eastward--“until you strike the Yellowstone, and follow that. By taking
the latter course you would have the trail of the survey-party as a
guide.”

“Thank you, sir. I think we’ll go by way of the Yellowstone, then.
Should we strike due east from here?”

“Yes. Due east. Or you may bear north of east if you prefer; you will
save a little time by doing so.”

“Then we will go north-east, as we wish to get to Bozeman as quickly as
possible. Is there any danger from Indians on the way, sir?”

“No; I think not. But you will do well to look out for horse-thieves.
They have a secret hiding-place somewhere about this country, and if
they can run off your stock they will do so.”

“We will take care, sir. And many thanks for your information. Now, you
fellows [to us], right about face, and quick march!”

At which command, waving our hands to the strangers, we turned our
backs upon geyser-land and once more plunged into the woods.

In the middle of the second day we came out into a fine, park-like
stretch of country, and there, straight before us, ran a large,
easy-flowing river,--the celebrated Yellowstone.

Following along this handsome stream, stirring up flocks of wild ducks,
and disturbing the snowy pelicans which were fishing in rows upon the
banks, we came presently upon the trail of a large number of horses and
mules going in the opposite direction.

“Good!” exclaimed Jack. “Here’s our guide to Bozeman. This is the trail
of the survey-party, whom we must have passed in the woods sometime
yesterday. With this trail and the river to steer by we ought to have
no trouble in finding our way.”

The discovery of this trail had a very cheering effect upon us all.
Not that we needed any cheering up, for our life in the wilds was, to
Percy and me at least, the jolliest time we had ever spent, but after
“wandering around loose” so long, never knowing with any certainty just
where we were, it was pleasant to feel that in the winding thread cast
down here among the grass we had the beginning of the road home; that
by taking up this thread we might follow it to the great waters upon
whose farther shore we should find, we were very sure, loving hands
outstretched to welcome us.

But if the finding of the trail was pleasant to us, there were two
members of our party who, I almost believe, were still more delighted;
namely, our faithful mules. Sober old Joe turned into it at once
and pegged along with his usual businesslike air; but Calliope,
feeling that the occasion demanded a more emphatic expression of her
satisfaction, lifted her head and sent forth so piercing a war-cry
that the ducks and the pelicans fled squawking from the vicinity, the
slumbering deer sprang startled to their feet, and even my Lord, the
Grizzly, roused from his lair among the distant rocks, indignantly
wondered what strange wild beast it might be that thus dared to molest
his ancient, solitary reign.

With merry chatter, and with pleasant thoughts of the folks at home, we
jogged briskly along, camping that night on the verge of a magnificent
chasm, which, Jack said, would some day be known all over the world as
a sight to come and see. It was worthy of such a destiny; for it was
that splendid work of Nature, the Grand Cañon of the Yellowstone, than
which, as it seemed to me, there could be nothing under heaven more
beautiful or more impressive.

There was a threat of rain in the sky when, early next morning, we
started out again upon our northward course. Soon the roughness of the
country pushed us away from the river, and we found that the trail
was leading us up over the shoulder of a big mountain, among whose
rock-slides and ridges it was not always easy to follow it. As we
ascended we shortly found ourselves among the clouds, and through their
damp and chilly folds we urged our way, ever going up and up. Presently
there was a grumble of thunder and the rain began to fall; the rain
soon changed to snow; so, slouching our hats over our eyes, and turning
up the collars of our overcoats, we plodded on for an hour or more,
until, suddenly and unexpectedly, we rode out of this premature winter
into the glorious autumn sunshine. We were above the clouds.

Towards the south and east, as far as we could see, was spread the
dazzling white carpet, pierced in a thousand places by the mountain
peaks which lay like islands on a shining sea. Nowhere else on the
continent, I should think, can there be so vast a number of mountains
crowded into so small a space; and nowhere else are they more
inextricably jumbled together. It seems as though the mountain-chains
which radiate from this common centre have here been pressed together
and crumpled up; the symmetry of their lines destroyed. This confused
and intricate mass of mountains might very well be called “The Cradle
of the Rivers,” for from the snows which crown their heads issue three
of the longest rivers of the United States: the Missouri, the Colorado,
and the Snake. The rain-drops now falling from the clouds spread out
beneath us might eventually find their way to the Gulf of Mexico, the
Gulf of California, or the Pacific Ocean.

But while we were admiring the scene the clouds had gathered more
heavily, and now we were treated to the interesting phenomenon of a
smart thunder-storm going on beneath our feet. We could see the flashes
of lightning illumine the clouds, we could hear the booming and the
banging of the thunder, and knowing no reason why we should descend
into this turmoil only to be wet through, we dismounted, and sat down
in the sunshine to wait till it was over; a novel situation for all of
us.

In the course of half an hour the storm began to break, and great rifts
appeared in the clouds through which we could look down into the wet
valleys below. It reminded me of pictures illustrating the spots on
the sun. We were still sitting in the sun looking down through these
rents in the cloud-carpet as they softly opened and closed, when Percy,
seizing Jack by the arm, hastily exclaimed:

“Look, Jack! Look! Get your glass, quick!”

He pointed downwards, and there we saw, going at a brisk trot across
one of the little valleys a bunch of horses with two men riding behind
them.

Jack’s glass was out in a moment.

“Is it--?” Percy began.

“I believe it is,” interrupted Jack, knowing very well what the
question was going to be. “Have a look yourself, and see if you
recognise them.”

“That’s the pair, I believe,” said Percy. “Here, Tom, look quick,
before they disappear. Should you know the horses again?”

The gap in the clouds was closing rapidly, but I had time to get a good
look at the cavalcade.

“I can’t be quite certain,” said I. “You can’t very well identify a man
by the back of his neck, especially when he has his collar turned up;
but the number of loose horses is the same, and if the rider on the
black horse isn’t Bates I’m very much mistaken.”

“What are they doing here now?” asked Percy. “I supposed they would
have been far ahead of us by this time.”

“Perhaps they have been hiding in that secret place the gentleman spoke
of,” Jack replied. “Or perhaps the horses were worn out and they have
been resting them up in some high part of the mountains where they
could keep a good lookout for anyone coming after them. They seem to be
in a good deal of a hurry at present, anyhow; which is just as well,
for they will make twenty miles to our ten, and if they are bound for
Bozeman--though I should hardly think they would go there--they will
keep well ahead of us at that pace. It won’t do to trust to that,
though. I think we must set a guard at night for the rest of the
distance; especially as they might even reach their destination, turn
round again, and meet us on their way back, if they should return this
way. And that, I think, is rather probable; for all those horses and
mules of the survey-party must be a great temptation to gentlemen in
their way of business.”

This decision of the commander-in-chief met with our cordial approval,
and for the next few days we moved cautiously forward, keeping a sharp
lookout by day, and setting a guard at night. And a most unpleasant
duty did we find it, after a long day’s march, to stand guard through
the hours of darkness, when, by rights, we should have been asleep;
for, there being only three of us, and the nights being divided into
two watches of four hours each, we could each secure but one clear
night’s rest out of three--a great hardship to youngsters of our age.

It will be readily understood, therefore, that we had no spare
blessings to bestow upon Squeaky for putting us to all this extra
trouble, and that it was with much pleasure we went into camp one
evening, believing that two more days’ march, and consequently only one
more night of guard-mounting, would bring us to our destination.

We had unsaddled and turned loose the horses and mules that evening
as usual; Percy was on his knees, making the fire; Jack, followed by
Ulysses, had gone off to the creek for a bucket of water; I was in the
act of stooping to pick up my rifle preparatory to making a tour of our
camping-ground,--for it was my first watch that night,--when a voice
behind me said in a low but peremptory tone:

“Drop that!”

I looked round sharply to find, pointed square at my chest, the muzzle
of a rifle in the hands of a squat, red-haired man; while another
taller man was covering Percy. That their intentions were evil it was
easy to guess, for each of them was disguised by wearing a strip of
rag across the upper part of his face, having holes cut in it to look
through.

“Come here!” said the short man in a low voice. “Quick! Both of you.”

We advanced towards him.

“Sit down!” he commanded.

Having no means of resisting, we sat down, side by side.

“Now, keep quiet,” said the man; and turning to the other he went on:
“Pardner, get behind them. If either of ’em moves, blow his head off.”

[Illustration: “DROP THAT!”]

This gentle hint was not lost upon us; we sat silent and motionless
while the red-haired man, slipping away among the trees, disappeared
in the direction of the creek. In half a minute we heard his voice
again; there was some angry growling of old Ulysses, a few loud, sharp
words, and directly afterwards Jack appeared, carrying a bucket of
water in one hand and dragging Ulysses by the collar with the other;
urged upon his way by the persuasive influence of a rifle, the muzzle
of which was being held within two feet of the small of his back.

“Tie up your dog,” said the man, “if you don’t want him shot; and then
sit down by your friends.”

Jack did so--and there we were, captured at last, in spite of our
precautions.

That our captors were Squeaky and Bates we had no doubt whatever.
Squeaky’s voice would have betrayed him, even if we had had no previous
suspicions. It was plain, from their wearing masks, that they wished
to avoid recognition; besides which, Bates, as an extra precaution,
and evidently by preconcerted arrangement, was careful not to say a
word, knowing that we should almost certainly recognise his voice. As
someone, however, must issue orders, it fell to Squeaky to take that
risk of being found out; he perhaps hoping that if we should notice his
peculiar voice we should never think of connecting it with the man whom
we had overheard in the dark in the little cabin by the railroad track
away back in Nebraska. It must be remembered that neither of them was
aware of the fact that we had knowledge of their presence in this part
of the world.

“What’s all this about?” asked Jack, with a great show of boldness, as
soon as he was seated. “And who are you?” he added, at the same time
giving me a surreptitious nudge in the ribs, which I passed on to Percy.

Jack, of course, knew very well that Squeaky would not give the desired
information as to who they were; he merely asked the question as a hint
to us to pretend we did not know them.

“I’ll give you all the explanation I think proper after supper,”
Squeaky replied. “But there’s one thing I want you to understand right
now: if one of you tries to get up off the ground he won’t succeed;
he’ll be dead first. I mean it, mind you; so you’d better sit still if
you don’t want a bullet through you.”

As we had some knowledge of the peculiarities of our captor’s character
we took his word for it, and having little doubt that he did mean
it we sat still accordingly. Had we been dealing with Bates alone
we might perhaps have made a fight for it; he seemed to be nervous
and agitated. But with Squeaky it was quite another matter. He had
no nerves; and we felt pretty sure that if he should think it a
good stroke of business to shoot one or all of us, no tenderness of
conscience on his part would withhold him.

“Pardner,” said he, addressing Bates, “round up those guns; stack ’em
there against that tree, and take the cartridges out.”

Bates did as commanded, always in silence, and then Squeaky said:

“That’s good. Now, you’d better go and bring down the horses. I’ll hold
the prisoners.”

Bates retired into the woods, and in a quarter of an hour reappeared,
riding the black horse and leading another, both of which he proceeded
to picket in a little open space below the camp.

“Which of you boys is cook?” then asked the leader of this gang of two.

“I am,” replied Percy.

“All right. Get up, then, and cook supper for five. And don’t try any
tricks. I’m a pretty good shot. Pardner, take your stand by the guns.”

Percy rose to his feet, and for half an hour we sat still while he made
tea and cooked steaks of deer-meat enough for us all. Bread we already
had in plenty, for only the day before he had made a batch large enough
to last us until our journey’s end, as he supposed. He had not reckoned
upon entertaining two uninvited guests.

Squeaky was a methodical rascal; we could not help admiring the orderly
manner in which he conducted this affair. He must have thought out
all the details beforehand; or else he had been engaged in a similar
transaction on some previous occasion. As soon as the simple supper was
ready he proceeded again to issue his orders.

“Cook,” said he, “feed your friends.”

Percy brought our suppers to Jack and me and set them down before us.

“Get your own share, and come and sit down again.”

Percy did so.

“Pardner, help yourself.”

We four having eaten our supper, Bates, at the command of his leader,
once more took up his station behind us, while Squeaky helped himself
to something to eat. Kneeling on his right knee, his rifle held ready
for use in his left hand, he took a large piece of meat from the
frying-pan, and holding it in his fingers he tore big fragments from it
with his teeth; all the time keeping his watchful little eyes upon us.
He reminded me of the Mississippi steamboat-mate, in that he resembled
a dog engaged with a bone, who suspects that some other dog might like
a share of it.

“Now, cook,” said he, as he wiped his greasy fingers upon his
trouser-leg, “you can wash up; I guess you may as well help
him”--nodding at me.

“Finished?” inquired the systematic villain, as soon as the culinary
operations had been completed. “Well, then, just you sit down again,
close together. I want to have a little talk with you. Pardner, stand
a little way off from the end of the row, so as you can rake ’em if
desirable.”

Having made these dispositions, Squeaky upturned our bucket and sat
himself down upon it about ten feet away from us, his rifle across his
knees and his finger on the trigger, and thus addressed us:

“Well, boys, I’m glad to see you at last. We’ve been looking for you
for quite a spell, me and my pardner. We thought we’d lost you. It was
just a chance we see you coming along this evening, and decided to look
you up. Hope you’ve had a pleasant trip since you left Golconda.”

Squeaky made this final remark with so evident an expectation that we
should be overcome with astonishment, that we hastened to accommodate
him by looking as surprised as we conveniently could at such short
notice.

“What do you mean?” asked Jack. “How do you know we came from Golconda?
We’ve never met you before.”

“Oh, we know a thing or two, me and my pardner--eh, Pardner?”

Bates nodded.

“We know who you are, well enough. Don’t we, Pardner?”

Again Bates nodded.

“Can’t your partner speak?” asked Jack, innocently.

“Born deef and dumb,” replied Squeaky, without the slightest hesitation.

At this unexpected reply I forgot for the moment the awkwardness of
our present situation, and the fact that we did not wish to betray our
knowledge of the identity of the enemy, and began to laugh, when Jack,
by a monitory pinch, brought me up again with a jerk.

“What are you laughing at?” asked Squeaky, scowling.

I became preternaturally solemn in an instant; and by good fortune I
thought of a reasonable reply to the question.

“Why,” said I, “I was only thinking that your partner seemed to
understand pretty well for a man born deaf.”

“Yes, he does that,” assented Squeaky, in such a matter-of-fact manner
that I nearly laughed again.

“Well,” he continued, “we must get to business, because we won’t have
any time to-morrow morning. Now, just listen to me, and you,”--pointing
at Jack,--“you just pay attention; because the lives of these two boys
depends on you. Just you keep that in mind, now. This is no laughing
matter, you’ll find, young fellow,” with a grim nod at me. “I’m going
to tell you what me and my pardner have been hunting you for; and mind
you, I mean what I say.”

Squeaky hitched his bucket a trifle nearer, and shaking his forefinger
at Jack he thus addressed him, slowly and with much emphasis:

“Attend to me, now,” said he. “To-morrow morning you’ll take your
horse, and you’ll ride to Bozeman--you can make it by night if you
start early--and as soon as you get to Bozeman you’ll telegraph to the
fathers of these boys to send you ten thousand dollars.”

He paused for a moment to let his words take full effect, and then went
on:

“As soon as you get the money you’ll ride back here with it alone, and
you’ll go to the top of that flat-topped rock up there on the end of
that rise--See it? You may stand up if you can’t.”

“I see it,” said Jack. “Well?”

“You’ll bring the money with you, you’ll go to that flat-topped rock,
and you’ll build a big fire of green boughs on it so as to make a big
smoke. We shall see your smoke, ’cause we shall be looking out for it,
and my pardner here will come down to the rock, and you’ll follow him
to the place where me and these two boys’ll be. Then you’ll turn over
the money to me, and you and the boys can go where you like.”

We had little inclination to laugh now, and still less as Squeaky went
on.

“We’ll give you time enough,--say, ten days. That’ll allow for
accidents. We’ll look out for your smoke on the ninth and tenth days.
If there’s no smoke by sunset of the tenth day--remember! sunset of the
tenth day--I’ll shoot the boys, and you needn’t trouble to come at all.

“There; that’s your part of the business. Do you understand what you’ve
got to do? or shall I tell you all over again? I’ll tell you as often
as you like; because a mistake is likely to prove fatal.”

“I understand,” said Jack. “But----”

“Hold up a bit,” interrupted Squeaky; “I haven’t quite done yet. As
soon as you leave to-morrow morning we shall go off to a hiding-place I
know of. It won’t do you any good to bring a sheriff and posse to hunt
for us; you couldn’t find the place in a thousand years unless it was
by accident. If you should take the fancy to try the experiment--well,
we shall know of it, and the effect is likely to be injurious to the
health of your two friends here. You won’t find us; we shall be gone.
And so will the boys--only they’ll be gone to the place that nobody
ever comes back from.

“That’s all I’ve got to say. You know what you’ve got to do; and you
know the consequences if you fail. It’s just a plain business deal.
We have two boys for sale at ten thousand dollars the pair. If anyone
wants them, they can have ’em. If not----”

He finished his sentence with a grim nod, and a significant pat upon
the stock of his rifle.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER X

THE VALLEY OF THE MUSHROOM ROCK


We were far from laughing now. The calm, everyday tone in which Squeaky
had uttered the words, “I shall shoot the boys,” together with what we
knew of his character, convinced us that no mercy was to be expected of
him; and we trembled. Glancing at my companions to see how they took
it, I observed that I was likely to get little comfort from them. Percy
was sitting with his eyes unnaturally wide open, staring at Squeaky
without a wink; while Jack’s lips were tight shut, and his face, I
could see, was quite pale beneath the sunburn.

When I saw how much troubled Jack was I became more alarmed than ever;
for Jack was far more likely than I to be able to appreciate correctly
the seriousness of our position. Besides which, not having been
threatened himself, his fear, of course, was all on our account; and
when I thought of that I became cold all over.

I knew that the generous fellow would be taking all the blame to
himself if any harm should befall us two, and at that thought another
fear drove out the old one. I was afraid he might attempt something
desperate for our release.

I can never be thankful enough that that idea occurred to me in time.
Even as I thought of it I heard a rustle in the grass, and I saw that
Jack, who had been sitting with his elbows on his knees, had drawn one
foot beneath him and had placed one hand upon the ground, all ready for
a spring at Squeaky. It would have been madness to make the attempt;
and without a second’s hesitation I flung my arms around him, crying,
“No, Jack, you sha’n’t!”

“Very well, old chap, I won’t,” he whispered in my ear, with a rather
husky voice; and at this assurance I sat up again, still holding him by
the arm, however.

Squeaky had sprung to his feet, and, covering Jack with his rifle, he
said, quietly, “I wouldn’t if I was you.”

“I don’t intend to,” replied Jack; whereupon our captor sat down
again, and Percy, who had half risen, sank back upon the grass.

It was a rather curious fact, and it showed the comparative estimate in
which we held our two enemies, that, had the rush come, all three of
us would have gone straight at Squeaky, entirely forgetful of Bates;
though, had we known it, Bates was at that moment quite as dangerous as
his leader, perhaps more so, for he was holding his rifle pointed in
our direction, and he was trembling so that its unintended explosion
was more than a possibility.

The temporary excitement of this incident having abated, our captain
once more assumed his former position, and, addressing Squeaky, said:

“Look here, Mr.--Mr.----”

“Never mind names,” interrupted the other. “‘Mister’ is good enough.”

Jack nodded. “All right,” said he. “Then, Mister, I have one or two
things to say. First: Ten thousand dollars is too much.”

“No, it isn’t,” Squeaky promptly contradicted. “Me and my pardner has
means of knowing the financial standing of these boys’ fathers, and
we have fixed upon that amount. We’re not going to ’bate as much as a
ten-cent shinplaster, so you needn’t waste your breath on that point.”

Jack nodded again. “Well,” said he, “then there’s another point. Ten
days is much too short a time.”

“No, it isn’t,” interposed Squeaky, firmly.

“Yes, it is,” Jack repeated, with equal firmness. “Just consider a
minute. It will take me one long day to get to Bozeman; if my horse
should fall lame--he has no shoes--it would take two. It might take
me two to get back. There are four days out of my ten. Then the boys’
parents may not be at home; they may be travelling on the continent of
Europe, and it may take them two or three days to get home; besides
which, ten thousand dollars is a very considerable sum, and it may take
them several days to raise it.”

I thought Squeaky seemed to be impressed; and I thought, too, how
clever Jack was to think of all this when his thinking faculties had
just received such a shaking-up. But Jack had not finished yet; he had
reserved his most telling argument for the last.

“There’s one thing more,” he went on. “You want this money in cash, I
suppose. Well, do you think the town of Bozeman could get together ten
thousand dollars on the spur of the moment? Of course it can’t. The
money will probably have to come up from Salt Lake City by stage, and
that, as you know, will take four or five days itself. Your ten days’
limit is absurd; you’ll beat yourself if you stick to that. You ought
to make it a month.”

I half expected that Squeaky would be offended at Jack’s emphatic
manner of speech, but I was mistaken.

“You’re a smart chap,” said he, admiringly. “That sounds like a
sensible argument. Shut up, now, and let me think about it.”

After sitting for some time with his chin in his hand, frowning at the
landscape, the chief bandit straightened himself up upon his bucket and
delivered his final decision.

“We’ll give you three weeks,” said he. “That will allow plenty of
time for accidents and delays. Two days each way for you to ride to
Bozeman and back. That’s four. Ten days for the people on the other
side to raise the money and send it out. That’s two weeks. One whole
week for the money to come up from Salt Lake. That’s three weeks.
You’ll be back here with the money in three weeks. If you don’t get
here by then--well, I needn’t go over all that again. You know what’ll
happen if you don’t, that’s all. So, now we’ve got it all comfortably
arranged, we’ll go to bed.”

Squeaky here arose, and, taking up his old position behind us, said:

“Here, you,--no, not the cook, the other one,--get up and bring all
your blankets.”

Seeing that I was the “other one” alluded to, I brought the blankets
and threw them down in a heap.

“Make your bed,” was the next command.

I did so.

“Roll yourself up tight.”

I obeyed.

“Now then, next one, do the same; close to number one.”

Percy, and after him Jack, followed my example, and in ten minutes we
were lying side by side, tightly encased in our wrappings, like three
cocoons. It was an excellent arrangement from Squeaky’s point of view,
for it was impossible to rise in a hurry.

“Now, Pardner,” he continued, “I’ll go to bed myself. You shall take
the first watch. Wake me at midnight. If any of the prisoners tries to
get up, you know what you’ve got to do: shoot first, and inquire into
it afterwards.”

The head jailer then went to bed, taking his rifle with him, and Bates,
having placed the upturned bucket about ten feet beyond our heads, sat
down upon it and commenced his solitary vigil.

I was too much troubled to sleep, and I surmised that my companions
were in the same condition, for I could feel that Percy, who lay in the
middle, was fidgeting and squirming about, and now and then I could
see Jack’s head move. The night wore on, the fire died down and ceased
to pop and crackle, and presently a new sound began to make itself
heard,--a mixed sound of snorting and choking. It was Squeaky, snoring.

Directly afterwards there was a rustle among the grass, followed by
a sound of whispering, and turning my face in that direction I was
surprised to see Bates on one knee whispering something in Jack’s ear.
He had given up being deaf and dumb,--for the moment at any rate.

Jack listened without moving, and then, in low, eager tones, appeared
to be making some request. Whatever it was, Bates replied in the
negative, shaking his head emphatically, and rising to his feet again
he returned to his bucket.

Jack, however, apparently made a motion as if to rise, for Bates, in a
hasty, anxious manner, said, under his breath, “Lie down; or I shall
have to shoot”; upon which Jack lay still again.

Presently I heard more whispering, and the next thing was that Percy
turned toward me and said softly:

“Tom. Awake?”

“Yes.”

“Bates says he won’t let him shoot us.”

Oh, excellent Bates! If it had not been too dangerous an experiment to
attempt I would have jumped up and shaken hands with him. Under the
circumstances, however, I thought it better to refrain. Percy went on:

“Jack asked him to let us go; but he daren’t. Squeaky would shoot him.”

At this moment Squeaky gave such a snort that he woke himself up, and I
heard him say, “All right, Pardner?” To which Bates, as it was no use
to nod in the dark, replied aloud, “All right.”

“I guess you may as well turn in,” Squeaky continued. “It isn’t
midnight yet, but I’ve had sleep enough, and you want more than I do,
anyway.”

Needless to say, we three lay as still as mice while this change was
being effected, pretending to be asleep, and my mind being greatly
relieved by Bates’s assurance that we should not be shot, my simulated
sleep soon turned into the real thing, and I did not move again until
Squeaky’s unpleasant voice aroused me next morning to a sense of our
situation.

In the same systematic manner in which he had directed affairs the
previous evening, Squeaky superintended the cooking of the breakfast
and the saddling and packing of the horses and mules. Before that
operation was completed, however, Jack requested that his rifle be
restored to him. “I might need it,” said he; “especially coming back
with the money.”

“That’s a fact,” replied Squeaky. “Yes, you may take your rifle and
cartridge-belt. You needn’t load just yet, though.”

“There’s another thing,” said Jack. “I want the correct addresses of
these boys’ parents.”

“All right,” Squeaky assented. “Hurry up, though.”

Jack produced a pencil and a scrap of paper, wrote down the addresses,
and handed the paper to Percy.

“Is that all correct?” he asked.

“All correct,” replied Percy, in a rather peculiar voice as I thought,
passing the paper over to me.

If there was anything peculiar in the tone of Percy’s reply, the reason
for it was in my hand; for, at the bottom of the paper, Jack had
written, “I’ll put in two or three days tracking you, if you say so.”

“Perfectly correct,” said I, handing the paper back to him, and
looking hard at him, meanwhile, that he might understand I referred
particularly to the last line.

“Very well,” said Jack. “Then I’m ready to start. I’ll take something
to eat with me, if you please, as I may not get in to-night.”

He pocketed some bread and meat, untied Ulysses, mounted Toby, and,
turning to us, said cheerfully, “Good-bye, you fellows. Keep up your
spirits. I’ll see you safely out of this; don’t you be afraid.” Then,
turning to Squeaky, he said abruptly, “Say five thousand.”

“Ten,” replied Squeaky, with equal abruptness, “or you needn’t come at
all. And no tricks, mind you. It’s dangerous for the boys.”

Jack nodded. “Twenty-one days from to-day, then. Good-bye.”

Waving his hand, away he rode; Ulysses, who could not understand why he
should have been tied up all night, running and leaping joyously before
him.

For half an hour we stood watching our captain, until we saw him,
against the sky-line of a distant hill, turn and wave his hand as he
disappeared over the brow. Then, and not till then, Squeaky gave the
order to mount.

It was not a very hilarious procession that set out that morning from
our late camping-place. First rode the speechless Bates, then came the
two mules, who were, after their fashion, as uneasy at the departure
of Toby as we were at the departure of Toby’s master, and lastly came
Squeaky, who, that we might not from ignorance run any needless risks,
had significantly informed us that any attempt on our part to swerve to
the right or left would result in a bullet in the back.

For half a day we rode slowly but steadily upwards, until, having
passed through the pine-woods, we came out upon a long, bare ridge,
connecting two mountain peaks. Ascending to the crest of this stony,
wind-swept “hog-back,” upon whose hard surface the hoofs of our animals
left no trace whatever, we presently found our further progress barred
by a little precipice some thirty or forty feet high which ran the
whole length of the ridge from one peak to the other. It was plain we
could not jump down there, but unless we had come to the end of our
journey we could not see what else we were expected to do.

At this point, whence we could see a long stretch of the Yellowstone
Valley behind us, Squeaky ordered us to stop, and taking Jack’s
field-glass, which he had appropriated to his own use, he examined
the trail by which we had come up and all the country about with the
greatest minuteness. Evidently he had a suspicion that Jack might be
following. Our hearts were in our mouths while this examination was
going on, and great was our relief when at length Squeaky put up the
glass, and turning to Bates gruffly ordered him to go on.

Bates swerved to the left, and continued along the ridge until he had
come near the foot of one of the peaks,--an unscaleable mass of rocks.
In spite of our anxiety, Percy and I could not help feeling interested
in the problem as to where we were to go now. With a precipice on the
right and an impassable mountain in front of us it seemed as though
the only course remaining would be to turn still more to the left and
descend again into the valley.

But Bates knew what he was about; he had been here before. He turned
down-hill for a short distance, and, threading his way between numbers
of great rocks which had rolled down from the mountain, he presently
entered a narrow chasm--so narrow that the mules with their loads had
barely room to pass--and began to go steeply down-hill.

For ten minutes we scrambled down this dry watercourse, the walls on
either side becoming higher and higher as we descended, until presently
we heard the splashing of water, and looking ahead we saw a shallow
stream rushing madly past the mouth of our gully. Arrived at the edge
of this stream we found that immediately on our left it fell foaming
in a miniature cascade into a pool a hundred feet below, while from
the right it came tearing down its smooth stone bed like a mill-race.
Straight before us towered a blank wall of rock.

“Which way now?” I said softly to Percy; for the gully had here widened
out, and I had resumed my place beside him.

“Up the bed of the stream, I suppose,” he replied. “There’s no other
way.”

Percy was right; for Bates without hesitation entered the water, which,
fortunately, was no more than a mere sheet an inch deep, and began
slowly to clamber up the slope.

Happening at this moment to glance upward, I noticed, on the edge
of the cliff exactly above my head, a great wedge-shaped rock which
looked so very much as though it were on the point of falling down that
instinctively I pressed forward to get past the danger-point. As I did
so, Percy, who was slightly in the rear of me, whispered hastily:

“Tom; hold back. Let me get in front of you. I have a shotgun cartridge
in my pocket, and I want to drop it near the water as a guide to Jack,
in case he should be able to trail us this far.”

“All right,” said I, without looking round; and forging ahead he
succeeded in dropping the cartridge without exciting the suspicions of
our watchful guard; with great circumspection making it appear that he
was intent only upon urging the reluctant mules to follow Bates’s horse.

After a short upward climb between overhanging walls, we turned a
corner and saw before us the low, arching mouth of a cave, whose
floor, as far as we could see, was entirely covered by a pool of water,
the source, undoubtedly, of the stream in which we stood.

Into this gloomy den rode Bates, the mules following, and Percy and I,
side by side again, behind them. The depth of the water appeared to be
about three feet, and as the darkness of the cave increased it was by
the splashing of the mules alone that we were able to tell which way to
go.

“Tom,” whispered Percy, when it had become so dark that we could no
longer see each other, “Tom, here’s our chance. Let us slip off and sit
down in the water until Squeaky has passed us.”

“All right,” said I. “Now?”

“Yes, now.”

But Squeaky frustrated our design. As if he had been suspecting some
such move on our part, the wily rascal, at the very moment when I had
freed my feet from the stirrups, struck a match, and holding it aloft,
said:

“No tricks, now, boys.”

He was a sharp fellow, if he was a bad one.

As soon as that match burned out he struck another and another, until
the appearance of daylight before us--for the cave turned out to be
merely a natural tunnel--rendered such precautions no longer necessary.

Emerging again from beneath the arched roof, we found ourselves in a
second dry watercourse, enclosed like the other by high perpendicular
walls. Evidently the springs which fed the pool were strong enough to
send the water down this way also when the snow-banks were melting on
the mountains in the early summer. Along this deep cleft we made our
way for half an hour, going sharply down-hill all the time, until,
at a point where the rocks came more than usually close together, we
were stopped by an unexpected barrier,--a set of bars such as form the
entrance of a corral. As soon as Percy saw these bars he whispered to
me, “The horse-thieves’ hiding-place.”

I had no doubt that Percy was right, especially as we saw beyond
the barrier, on a natural shelf some six feet from the ground, a
stone-built fortification large enough to hold a dozen men, loopholed
for rifles, and so placed as to command the steep slope we had just
descended.

Passing the bars, which Bates let down and Squeaky set up again, we
turned a corner to find that the passage suddenly terminated, and that
we had come into the upper end of a very remarkable little valley, in
the bottom of which several horses were feeding,--the stolen horses, we
had no doubt.

But it was the valley rather than the horses which claimed our
attention. It must have been, I believe, the crater of an ancient
volcano,--there are many of them in that country,--which in the course
of thousands of years had been nearly filled up by the _débris_ falling
from the surrounding peaks. The bottom of the valley consisted of a
beautiful smooth meadow, some two miles long by a mile in width. Around
this meadow were high banks composed of earth and fragments of stone,
thickly covered with pine-trees, while behind the trees, encircling the
whole valley, was a wall of rock from fifty to a hundred feet high. As
far as we could see, the wall was without a break, excepting only that
at its northern, or right-hand, end it was split from top to bottom;
the split forming a narrow gap through which a voluminous stream went
boiling and foaming over the stones. The stream was much larger than
one would expect from the limited size of the valley, but we observed
that at least six little waterfalls--and how many more we did not
know--came pouring over the edge of the valley-wall, having their
sources in the mountains which on every side rose high above the rim of
the wall itself.

To all appearance there was no way in or out of the horse-thieves’
hiding-place save through the passage by which we had come down,
unless, possibly, one might pass down the gorge where the stream ran
out.

That the elevation of the old crater was pretty considerable was
evident from the fact that, though the slopes below the wall were well
wooded, the mountains above were bare, or nearly so, a few stunted,
twisted trees growing here and there among the rocks showing plainly
enough that we were but a short distance below timber-line.

As soon as we had descended through the fringe of trees which bordered
the grass-land, we descried upon the opposite side of the valley a
little, roughly built cabin, standing with its back to the wall and its
face toward us; a wretched little hovel, with a stumpy stone chimney
and a doorway without any door. Behind the cabin rose a fine peak from
whose sides there had fallen so large a heap of loose rocks as to make
it appear that at that one point perhaps it might be possible to climb
out of the valley. Percy quietly called my attention to the fact as we
rode across the meadow.

Beside a stream which came down from this peak, and not very far
removed from the cabin, there stood an object which at once attracted
our attention,--a rock of very peculiar shape. It was like a gigantic
mushroom, forty feet high; the stalk, which must have been thirty feet
thick, constituting about half of the total height, while the cap,
projecting on all sides far beyond the stalk, must have been more than
twice as wide as the latter. Indeed, considering how much the cap
overhung, and considering, moreover, that it was split in two across
the middle, it was a wonder to us that it did not fall off; one would
think that a good stiff breeze might blow it down.

Having traversed the little valley at its upper end, we drew up before
the cabin, and there dismounted. By command of Squeaky, Percy and I
unsaddled the horses and unpacked the mules,--which at once wandered
off to fraternise with the strange horses, they, with equal curiosity
having galloped up to see who we were,--during which operation Bates
busied himself by cutting a supply of fire-wood, while the vigilant
Squeaky kept watch and ward over us.

After a hearty supper, which Percy and I cooked, and of which, in spite
of our unpleasant situation, we ate a very fair share, we were ordered
into the cabin for the night. Our blankets were thrown upon the floor,
and a fire of big logs was started in the fireplace.

“That’ll help to keep you warm,” remarked our captor, “and it’ll keep
you from trying to climb out by the chimney,”--an idea which had
occurred to both of us the moment we entered the hovel.

Squeaky next took an elk-hide, and, extracting the nails from several
old horseshoes which lay about, he pegged the hide over the doorway,
thus shutting us in completely.

“Now, boys,” said he, from the other side of the hide, “you can go to
bed whenever you like. Don’t try to get out. One of us will be on guard
all the time and if we hear you trying to scratch out we shall just
fire through the doorway or through the chinks, and you’ll have to take
your chance of being hit. So take my advice, and go to bed like good
boys. Good-night.”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XI

A COUNTER-STROKE


It was all very well for Squeaky to recommend us to go to bed; we had
something else to do first, namely, to talk over the situation. The
possibility of escape was naturally the first subject to be discussed.

“I don’t see any chance of it at present,” said Percy. “But perhaps,
after we have been here a few days, if we don’t show any desire to get
away, they may become less vigilant and we may find an opportunity. If
Squeaky for any reason should go away and leave Bates in charge, that
would be our best chance. We might tackle Bates--I’m not very much
afraid of him--but I am afraid of Squeaky, most decidedly afraid.”

“So am I,” I responded. “I’m pretty certain he would kill us if he
thought proper, and though Bates might try to prevent him I’m not so
sure that he could do so. If Jack----”

“Sh!” whispered Percy, tapping me upon the knee, and pointing with his
thumb toward the doorway. There was a rustle in the grass, and the
sound of breathing close to the elk-hide. Somebody was listening.

“Jack is sure to be back in three weeks,” Percy announced in an
audible voice for the benefit of the listener. “Three weeks ought to
be ample time, and you may be sure he won’t let the grass grow under
his feet. As for ourselves, as there’s no chance that I see of getting
out of this place, the best thing we can do is to make ourselves as
comfortable as we can while we stay here.”

“You are right,” I replied. “That’s the best thing to do. Your father
and mine will certainly pay rather than have us killed, and these men
probably know that. If it should take more than three weeks to get the
money out, Jack will come and say so, and they will give him the extra
time necessary; they will hardly be such idiots as to kill us when they
might get a thousand pounds apiece by keeping us alive.”

“That’s true,” said Percy. “Well, since we are agreed to make the best
of it, let us begin at once by going to bed.”

With that we arose and proceeded to make the beds, keeping our ears
cocked meanwhile toward the door. Percy winked at me when once more we
heard the swishing among the grass which announced the retreat of the
spy.

The night passed without incident, and very early next morning Squeaky
unbuttoned the door and commanded us to come out. Both he and Bates
were still wearing their masks; whether they slept in them or not I
cannot say.

“Pardner,” said the former, as soon as we appeared, “you may as well go
and bring up my horse. Cook, start the breakfast. You other, chop some
wood.”

We set about our allotted tasks; but presently Percy, pointing to an
empty bucket, remarked:

“I haven’t any water.”

“Go and get some, then,” said Squeaky; but as Percy picked up the
bucket he added, “You other, go with him. It’s easier to keep an eye
on you while you are both together. You’ll find a place down by that
rock,” pointing to the mushroom rock, which stood about fifty or sixty
yards away.

Leaving our warder watching us, rifle in hand, we walked down to the
spot indicated. The little creek, we found, had cut for itself a groove
in the stone floor of the valley, and just below the rock was a little
waterfall about a foot high, very convenient for filling a bucket.
As Percy stooped for the purpose, he suddenly checked himself, and
exclaimed in a quick whisper:

“Tom, Tom! Look there!”

Following the direction of his gaze--for he dared not point--I saw,
just above the little cascade, a round, basin-like pot-hole in the
stone bed of the creek, and in it, lying upon a layer of very black
sand, a yellow lump resembling in size and shape a soldier’s button.

“Is Squeaky looking?” whispered Percy.

“Yes,” said I, glancing out of the corners of my eyes at our guard.

Without any further delay Percy filled the bucket and rose again, but
as he straightened up he said softly:

“It’s gold! I’m going to upset the bucket and come back. Stand between
me and Squeaky when I do so.”

“All right,” said I.

With an admirable imitation of naturalness, Percy, when we had covered
half the return distance, caught his toe against a root and fell upon
his face, sending the water all over my legs and filling my boots so
that they went _squish-squish_ when I hopped about, which I did with a
naturalness in which there was no imitation; it was perfectly genuine;
so genuine that Squeaky burst into a loud guffaw at the sight.

Percy at once arose, threw out the remnant of water, and walked
straight back to the creek, while I interposed my body between him
and Squeaky as best I could. He soon returned, and walking up to the
camp-fire without looking at me set down the bucket; but I observed
that his right coat-sleeve was soaked, and as the corner of one pocket
showed a wet stain I felt pretty sure that he had the nugget safely in
that pocket.

Anxious as we were to get together in order that we might talk over
this surprising find, we had no opportunity just then, and events
followed each other so quickly immediately afterwards that, impossible
though it may seem, we actually forgot all about the nugget until
several days later.

It will naturally be supposed that any events which could make us
forget so notable an occurrence as the discovery of gold after all our
fruitless searching must be events of some importance, and that they
were so I shall, I believe, be able soon to show.

Breakfast was no sooner over than Squeaky, turning to us, said:

“Boys, I’m going for a bit of a ride this morning up to the hog-back.
I want to see that your friend hasn’t taken a notion to follow us. My
pardner, here, will stand guard over you while I’m gone.”

Here was news! Here was the head jailer about to give us the very
opportunity we had been hoping for! I was afraid to look at my
fellow-prisoner for fear I should be unable to restrain my inclination
to wink at him. My exultation, however, was short-lived, for Squeaky
went on:

“But he’s a tender-hearted sort of chap, is my pardner, and he might
make some bones about shooting you if you tried to get away, so I’m
afraid I’ll have to tie you up for a couple of hours. You’re valuable
property, you see--and I can’t afford to lose you.”

This announcement was not so pleasant. I wondered if Squeaky could
possibly have overheard us speaking of our chances of escape if he
should leave us in charge of Bates. Probably not. It is more likely
that his natural acuteness led him to suspect that we might make the
attempt if only he himself were out of the way. This time, though, he
was not quite sharp enough. My quick-witted chum very cleverly stole a
march on him.

I was on my knees at the time, washing up; Percy was kneeling beside
me drying the things with our own private dish-rag; while Bates stood
a little distance off saddling a horse--not the same horse, I noticed,
that Squeaky had ridden the day before. Percy also noted this fact,
and, with a presence of mind I have never ceased to admire, he took
instant advantage of it. Nodding his head toward Bates he remarked in a
casual manner:

“Isn’t he saddling the wrong horse?”

The remark caused Squeaky to turn his head, and in that brief instant
Percy slipped the knife he happened to be wiping into his high boot,
snatched up another, and in a perfectly unconcerned manner went on
rubbing away with the dish-rag.

“No,” said our unsuspecting proprietor, “he’s all right. Come, hurry
up. I’ve no time to waste.”

Our task completed, Squeaky instructed Bates to cut off a length from
one of our picket-ropes, which being done he unravelled the piece, and
taking a couple of strands he tied Percy’s arms behind him just above
the elbows. Having performed the same office for me, he stood for a
while contemplating the result.

“Put your hands in front of you,” he commanded.

We obeyed, to find that our finger-tips would just meet. Squeaky shook
his head.

“Won’t do,” said he. “You might untie each other. I may as well make a
good job of it while I’m about it. It’ll be a bit uncomfortable, but it
won’t be for very long. I guess you’ll have to stand it.”

With that he took two more strands of the rope, and tied our wrists
together behind us. Once more he examined his handiwork, and this time
appeared to be satisfied.

“That’ll do,” said he. “Now get into your cabin.”

Having driven us in, like a couple of sheep, he fastened the hide over
the doorway, and left us, with the information that he would be back
in about two hours; unless, indeed, he should happen to get sight of
Jack prowling around, in which case it might take him another two hours
to stalk and shoot him. It was a horrid suggestion, expressed in his
usual matter-of-fact way, and we did not doubt he meant it. It filled
us with anxiety. We heartily wished we had never consented to Jack’s
proposition that he should try to follow our trail. Our only comfort
was in the thought that Jack was fully aware of the risk he ran, and
that he would take every precaution--for our sakes as well as his own.

Standing close to the doorway, listening intently, we heard Squeaky
giving instructions to Bates, and directly afterwards the clatter of
hoofs proclaimed that he had ridden off.

“Tom,” Percy hastily whispered, at the same time going down upon his
knees, “get up on my shoulders, quick.”

The reason for this seemingly senseless request was that, the elk-hide
being too short to cover the whole of the doorway, there was a gap of
three inches at the top through which one might look out if he could
reach high enough. Following Percy’s instructions, I bestrode his neck,
and he then rose carefully to his feet; no easy task for either of us,
considering that we were deprived of the use of our hands. For Percy
it was especially difficult, but fortunately he was very stout on his
pins, and after one or two preliminary wabbles which threatened to send
me headlong to the floor, he succeeded in standing upright.

For five minutes he thus supported me, while I watched Squeaky as he
rode across the open, entered the strip of woods, appeared again on the
other side, and vanished into the gorge, when I whispered, “All right,”
and Percy going down upon his knees again, I dismounted.

Without an instant’s pause my companion leaned back against the wall,
put up his foot, and whispered to me to pull off his boot. Backing
up to his foot I seized the boot-heel with my bound hands, and after
some ineffectual struggles Percy withdrew his foot; in doing so he
pulled out the knife also, which fell upon the floor with a clank loud
enough, as it seemed to us, to wake the echoes. We paused, breathless,
listening for Bates to make some movement, but he apparently had heard
nothing.

Percy, by lying down upon the ground, managed to get hold of the knife,
and grasping it firmly by the handle, point upward, the edge toward
himself, he rose to his feet again.

“Now, Tom,” said he, “get back to back. Pass the rope that ties your
wrists over the point of the knife and work it up and down against
the edge. I’ll hold the knife steady. Don’t cut yourself; it’s pretty
sharp.”

With some difficulty, being unable to see what I was doing, I followed
these instructions, and after about two minutes’ sawing the rope broke
with a pop and my hands were free. I took the knife from Percy, and
being able now to see my work, I soon cut his bonds; when he, in turn,
freed my elbows, and our hands once more became serviceable members.

“What’s the next move, Percy?” I asked, as I cast the remnants of rope
into the corner. “How are we to get at Bates?”

“Let us cut a hole in the hide first, so that we can see what he is
doing,” Percy replied. “Climb up on my shoulders again.”

I was soon up this time. Bates was sitting quietly on a log with his
face towards the cabin.

“Is he looking?” asked Percy.

“Yes,” said I.

“Tell me when he looks away, and I’ll cut a hole in the hide.”

Bates presently turned his head.

“Now!” said I; and Percy instantly “jabbed” the knife through the hide
and withdrew it again. He then inserted a small bit of bark into the
hole to keep it open, and as the hairy side of the hide was outward,
and the hole therefore invisible, we could keep watch on Bates’s
movements without his being aware of the fact.

“We must make him move somehow,” said Percy, after I had once more
descended to the ground. “It won’t do to try to rush him from here; he
might be surprised into shooting us, even if he didn’t intend to.”

After proposing and dismissing a variety of more or less impracticable
plans, we hit upon a device which, as it seemed to us to promise well,
we agreed to attempt.

The chimney of our cabin projected only about six inches above the
roof, and, the cabin being built upon the slope of the hill, its roof
was so much above the level of the ground at the camp-fire that anyone
standing down there could not see the chimney-top. Percy had noted the
fact that very morning, and it was upon that fact that we based the
plan for our deliverance.

While I kept watch upon Bates, Percy climbed up the inside of the
chimney, and with great care removed the stones which formed its front
wall, laying them one by one upon the roof. In ten minutes this was
accomplished, and he then came softly down again.

“Did he move?” he asked.

“No,” I replied. “He didn’t hear a sound, evidently. Did you get it all
down? Can you get out, do you think?”

“Oh, yes, I can get out. The thing now is to bring him up close. Watch,
while I stir him up.”

Percy stepped to the wall of the cabin, and taking hold of a big piece
of loose bark he ripped it off. At the sound Bates sprang to his feet,
all alert in an instant, advanced a step or two, and stopped.

“Scratch!” I whispered.

Percy scraped the piece of bark upon the floor, making a small but
distinct sound, upon hearing which Bates advanced again on the tips of
his toes. His suspicions were aroused; which was just what we wanted.

I held up my finger. Percy stopped, and so did Bates. I could see by
his expression that he was listening intently. Once more the operation
was repeated, with the same result, and Bates being now within ten feet
of the cabin, Percy handed the piece of bark to me and himself crept
into the fireplace.

I stepped to one side of the cabin, scratched a little, and hopped back
to the peep-hole, just in time to see Bates go picking his way round
the corner of the house. Immediately afterwards a handful of dirt fell
into the fireplace: a preconcerted signal to let me know that Percy was
safely up on the roof.

I then got inside the fireplace myself, that being the safest situation
in case Bates should fire through the chinks,--though we did not
believe he would do so,--and reaching as far as I could round the
corner, I began scraping the floor of the cabin near the wall with the
crackling bark, pausing every now and then to listen.

It was an anxious moment, for the success of our plan depended upon my
being able to induce Bates to come close to the wall. Percy, I knew,
was lying flat upon the roof, eagerly awaiting his opportunity; but
where was Bates? That was the important question.

Once more I began scratching on the floor, when, as if he had known of
my anxiety, and was desirous of removing it, Bates, with an assumed
gruffness of voice which nearly made me give vent to an inopportune
laugh, called out:

“Stop that! If you try to scratch out, I’ll shoot.”

I stopped for an instant, and then began again, very softly, hoping to
draw him close to the wall to listen. The ruse was most successful.
Not only did he come close, but he stooped down with his ear to one of
the chinks.

Now or never was our chance! and my watchful chum was not the one to
miss it. At the moment when Bates bent down with his head close to
the wall, Percy, leaping lightly from the roof, landed--by no means
lightly--with both knees upon the middle of our jailer’s back, sending
him to the ground with all the breath driven out of his body.

“Come on!” he shouted; and at the call I rushed at the door, burst it
bodily from its fastenings, and ran round the house, to find Bates
lying upon his face with Percy sitting upon him, holding him firmly by
both elbows.

“Get some rope!” cried Percy, the instant I appeared.

Back I ran to the camp, cut off three feet of rope, and returned to
the rear of the cabin. Within five minutes Bates was bound hand and
foot--perfectly helpless.

Leaving our prostrate enemy where he lay--after first taking away
his rifle--we hastened to the camp, whence, with our own rifles and
cartridge-belts in our hands, we set off as hard as we could run across
the valley.

Arrived at the bars, we paused for breath; and having held a brief
consultation as to whether we should go on or await Squeaky’s return
where we were, we decided finally to go on; for, though this would be
an excellent place in which to lie in wait for him, and though by going
on we might come upon him unawares and thus lose our present advantage
of taking him by surprise, we were bound to think of Jack, who, for all
we knew, might at that moment be in need of our help.

We had arrived at this conclusion, and I had put my foot upon the
lowest rail preparatory to climbing over, when we heard faintly the
sound of a horse’s hoofs clattering down the bare stone bed of the
gorge.

“This way, this way!” whispered Percy, in great excitement; and turning
about, we ran back a few steps and clambered up into the little
fortification which I have before mentioned as commanding the passage.

“We’ll let him come through the bars and set them up again,” said
Percy, speaking very quickly, “and then he won’t be able to run back.
As soon as the bars are up I’ll step out and order him to throw up his
hands. If he makes any sign of an intention to shoot, you must shoot
at him through the loophole. Will you do it?”

Percy asked this question, knowing very well by his own feelings how
reluctant I should be to shoot a man.

“Yes,” I replied, after a short hesitation, “I’ll do it. As far as I
see there’s nothing else for it. It is his life or ours; so, as it
can’t be helped, I’ll do it.”

Seeing how hard it went with me to assent to this course, Percy
magnanimously offered to change places with me, though it would have
been quite as hard for him as for me; but to this I would not agree,
and so we let the arrangement stand as it was, sincerely hoping that
Squeaky might submit without a fight. Had we had more time we might
have hit upon some other plan, but hurried as we were we had no
opportunity for a full discussion of the matter.

As it was we had hardly settled upon our course of action, when round
the corner there came, full into view, a man on foot, with a horse
walking behind him.

It was Jack!




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XII

A GOOD RIDDANCE


Jack, when he rode away towards Bozeman the morning before, had no
sooner placed the hill between us and himself than he turned short to
his left and galloped off in a new direction. Keeping in the shelter
of the woods, he circled back until he arrived at a point considerably
higher than the camp, whence he could look down upon us and note the
direction we took when we set out for the horse-thieves’ hiding-place.

Having no pack-mules to drive, it was easy for him to keep ahead of our
party, and when, about three in the afternoon, Squeaky stopped to scan
the valley behind us for signs of our captain’s presence, our captain
himself, half a mile to one side of the trail, was lying flat upon his
stomach on the mountain-side five hundred feet above, looking down at
us.

There he lay, watching, while we followed Bates along the top of the
ridge and in among the loose rocks which concealed the entrance to the
little cañon, which in turn led up to the tunnel. Knowing nothing, and
for the time suspecting nothing, of any such underground passage, Jack
lay still, waiting for our reappearance, or at least for a sight of
the smoke of our camp-fire, until dark, when he went back to the dry
gully where he had left the horse and dog, and riding part way down the
mountain again he made camp for the night. In a secluded hollow well
concealed by the trees he lighted a little fire, and wrapping himself
in the saddle-blanket, he passed a rather comfortless night; for at
that altitude and at that time of year the night-frosts were decidedly
sharp.

At daylight next morning he returned to his post of observation, and
there he again kept watch until an hour after sunrise, waiting, in vain
of course, for the telltale smoke of a camp-fire to inform him of our
whereabouts. As no such smoke appeared he became convinced that the
hiding-place must be some capacious cave, whose entrance was concealed
among the loose rocks; and very much troubled he was to decide whether
to go on or to give up the attempt. He decided at last to go on.

Riding down to the point where we had disappeared from view, he there
left Toby standing, and went forward on foot, with Ulysses, who seemed
perfectly to comprehend the state of the case, sniffing along in front
of him. The ground was so hard that no sign of a hoof-mark was to be
seen; nevertheless there must have been a lingering scent of the mules
and horses, for the old dog, without any hesitation, led the way to the
dry watercourse, and down it to the edge of the stream. There, to his
great satisfaction, Jack picked up a shotgun cartridge, and at once he
jumped to the conclusion that one of us had had the sense to drop it as
a guide for him.

Hastening back he brought Toby down, and taking up Ulysses on the
saddle--not knowing but that the stream might be strong enough to knock
the dog’s feet from under him and send him rolling over the fall--he
rode up the steep incline until he came in view of the arched mouth of
the tunnel.

“Ah,” thought he to himself, “so it is a cave.”

Once more he stopped to consider whether to go on or to turn back, and
once more he decided to go on.

Advancing into the cavern until there was but a glimmer of light
behind him and perfect darkness ahead, he stopped again, this time
for three or four minutes, listening with all his ears. There was no
sound of voices, no sound of a horse snorting or shaking himself, no
crackling of a fire, no smell of smoke. Jack began to suspect that the
cave was merely a passage. To make sure, he ventured to strike a match,
and looking quickly around he saw that he was probably right; there was
no opening visible anywhere, the walls were quite solid. At the same
time he observed that the reason he could not see daylight ahead was
that a big bulge in the wall at one side cut off his view.

Throwing the match into the water, he advanced around the bulge and
rode on slowly until he came in sight of the second dry watercourse
which led down to the valley, and there he paused again to listen.
It was well he did so. He had not been standing there one minute ere
he distinctly heard the click of horseshoes on the bare stone, and a
moment afterwards Squeaky rode into view, coming leisurely up the gully.

Jack backed away until he could no longer see the approaching enemy,
and then turning about he rode quickly but silently back to the far
side of the bulge. There, leaving Ulysses on the saddle, and putting
the reins into the dog’s mouth, with an order to keep quiet, he himself
slipped into the water, and wading some steps forward, squatted down
in the middle of the pool, his head and his hands only being above the
surface. It was not his intention to risk a shot in the dark,--indeed,
he was as much opposed to shooting a man as we were,--but he hoped to
be able to seize Squeaky by the foot as he passed and to throw him from
his horse into the water, when he would have a good chance of mastering
him.

Meanwhile Squeaky came riding into the tunnel, quite unsuspicious of
Jack’s presence, and advanced straight upon him, until Jack, fearing
that he was about to be trodden upon, was on the point of hitting
the horse upon the side of its head with his rifle-barrel to make it
swerve, when the horse itself, suddenly thrusting forward its nose,
snorted in Jack’s face and whirled round. This unexpected action
unseated Squeaky, who fell flat upon his face upon the water, at the
same time dropping his rifle, which exploded as it fell.

Jack was upon him in a moment, like a cat upon a mouse, and grasping
him by the collar with his right hand he pressed his head beneath the
water, while he held his rifle ready in his left to strike him upon the
skull if he must.

Squeaky was a powerful fellow, but on this occasion he had to do with
one as strong as himself. Taken by surprise, deprived of his weapon,
assaulted suddenly and vigorously from behind by a silent, unseen
enemy, and more than all, choked by the water every time he tried to
draw breath, he had no chance. The struggle lasted less than five
minutes, during a great part of which time Squeaky’s head was under
water. His efforts grew more and more feeble, and at length ceased
altogether.

Then, still holding him by the collar, all ready to duck him again if
he should be shamming, Jack dragged his defeated foe to the end of
the tunnel and dropped him upon dry ground, where he lay motionless,
streaming water from every part of his body. He was, in fact, very
nearly drowned.

Having whistled to Toby, who at once came wading out of the darkness,
Jack cut from the saddle three of the long buckskin strings with which
it was adorned, and with them he bound his still unconscious antagonist
by his wrists, his elbows, and his ankles.

The enemy being thus rendered entirely helpless, it remained to find
out whether he was dead or alive; a question which was solved in a
few minutes by the gasping and coughing of the captive as he began
to get his breath again. At these signs of recovery Jack felt a good
deal relieved, for though in his opinion it would be a benefit to the
community if Squeaky were dead, still he had no desire to be himself
the executioner.

As soon as Squeaky was sufficiently recovered to sit up, Jack, seeing
that he was shivering with cold, unceremoniously seized him by the
collar again and dragged him to a spot where the sun’s rays found their
way to the bottom of the cañon, and there propped him up with his back
against the wall.

“Well, Mr. Morgan,” said he, “it looks to me as if it were my turn now.”

At this address Squeaky opened his little piggy eyes as wide as they
would go. His hat, and with it his mask, had remained in the pool.

“Who are you calling ‘Mr. Morgan’?” he asked, with an injured air.

“You,” replied Jack. “That was your name back in Utah, I remember.
But I suppose a name doesn’t last more than three months or so with
gentlemen in your line of business. Never mind that, though. Where are
my friends?”

Squeaky looked hard at Jack for a minute, and then, thinking perhaps
that it would be as well to propitiate his captor, he replied:

“They’re in a little cabin on the other side of the valley down here.
They’re all right; at least they were half an hour ago.”

“Very well,” said Jack. “Then I’ll go down and call upon them. You will
have to stay here till I come back. I’ll leave you the dog for company;
and let me recommend you to sit still--he bites sometimes. Here,
Ulysses; mind him.”

Ulysses, who had left his perch on Toby’s back, advanced at the call,
and, lying down with his chin upon his crossed paws, stared fixedly at
the prisoner in a most embarrassing manner; upon which Jack, having
patted the dog and repeated the command to “mind him,” shouldered his
rifle, and, whistling to Toby to follow, walked off down the gully.

As he had surprised Squeaky, so he was destined to suffer a surprise
himself, for, ten minutes later, he was impetuously assaulted by us
two escaped prisoners, who, regardless of the rifle he instinctively
presented at our heads, rushed from our fortification, scrambled over
the barrier, and were “all over him” in a moment.

What a joyous meeting that was! What an immense relief to our minds to
find ourselves once more together, alive and unharmed! It was hard to
realize that we had been parted only for twenty-four hours; it seemed
much more like twenty-four days.

Very few words sufficed to explain the situation; when, assuming the
command again, Jack directed me to go back and look after Bates, while
he and Percy returned to the pool to bring Squeaky down.

In a short time our two prisoners were seated side by side with their
backs against the cabin wall, Ulysses and I standing guard over them,
while Jack and Percy at a little distance discussed in low tones the
somewhat difficult question as to what we were to do with them.

Percy presently came and relieved guard, and I then walked over to
Jack, who explained to me the plan decided upon--subject to my approval.

It was, in brief, that we should set out at once for Bozeman, and there
deliver up Squeaky to the authorities; charging him with kidnapping,
or blackmailing, or whatever the proper term might be by which his
offence was known to the law; at the same time giving information of
the stolen horses, which were to be left in the valley.

As to Bates, some time in the course of the journey he was to be
allowed _accidentally_ to escape. Besides a natural inclination to be
easy on our ex-schoolfellow,--an inclination to which Jack readily
deferred,--we felt sure that he had been led into this business more or
less against his will; we knew that he had expressed his intention to
preserve our lives, and we felt grateful to him accordingly; moreover
we were pretty sure that when free to go where he would, he would fly
with all speed to the other side of the Atlantic. And that, we were
agreed, was the very best thing he could do. We did not wish to ruin
his life by consigning him to jail for an unknown number of years; and
we reasoned that if anything would deter him from taking such risks
again, it would be the scare he would get when he found himself, as
he would suppose, about to be turned over to the tender mercies of
the Territorial authorities--a scare which, as his pale countenance
testified, was already beginning to press upon him pretty heavily.

As to the question whether or not we should disclose to Bates the
fact that we were aware of his identity, we decided in the negative,
thinking that it would be an act of charity to allow him to escape
unrecognised, as he would believe; for he still retained his mask, and
unless he should voluntarily discard it, we should have no difficulty
in keeping up our pretence of ignorance.

We decided also that Jack should do all the ordering, and that we two
should hold as little communication as possible with the prisoners.

The matter being settled we at once set about our preparations for
departure. While Percy, with Ulysses’ assistance, remained as guard,
Jack galloped off on Toby to bring up the mules and horses,--Squeaky’s
horse had returned of its own accord,--and I put together the packs,
now very light, for our provisions were almost entirely expended.

The mules being packed and the horses saddled, Bates’s bonds were cut,
and he was ordered to mount, I being set over him as guard. Next,
Squeaky’s horse was brought up, but before its owner was allowed to
mount, the bridle was pulled over the horse’s head and attached by a
short length of rope to the pack-saddle of the more sober of our two
mules--old Joe. Then, while Jack with cocked rifle stood over him,
Squeaky’s bonds were cut by Percy, and he was told to get into the
saddle. I was half afraid he would make a dash for liberty, but having
glanced from Jack to Percy, and from Percy back to Jack, and judging
from their attitude of determination that it would be well to obey,
persuaded too by the gleam of teeth displayed by the ready Ulysses, he
obeyed accordingly, growling to himself like a discontented bear.

We three having mounted, the procession started; Bates first, then I,
riding Toby in order that the mules might follow with docility, then
Calliope, who always took precedence of Joe, then Joe himself, towing
Squeaky’s horse, and last of all, Jack and Percy, side by side.

At the bars Bates was ordered to dismount and let them down, while
Percy, when we had passed through, stopped to put them up again. Soon
we entered the tunnel. As it began to get dark Jack produced from his
pocket half-a-dozen slivers of pitch-pine, and putting a match to
them, held them aloft for a torch. The flare showed up the walls and
the arched roof for a long distance before and behind, and if the
prisoners had entertained hopes of slipping away in the darkness they
were disappointed.

By midday we reached our old camping-ground, for we had descended
much more quickly than we had gone up the range, but without stopping
there we went on until six o’clock, when Jack gave the order to camp.
Our prisoners were fed and sent to bed, tightly rolled up in their
blankets, after the fashion that Squeaky had adopted with us, and one
or other of our party stood guard over them all night, Ulysses acting
as an efficient assistant to each of us. In the same order we set out
again next day, and jogged along till near noon, by which time we
judged we must be coming soon within sight of our destination.

All this time Bates had made no sign of wishing to escape, and I
was wondering how we were to get rid of him, when Percy came riding
along the line, and joining me, began a whispered discussion of that
very subject. He did not advance very far, however, for ere he had
finished his first remark an event occurred which rendered any further
discussion unnecessary.

Just ahead of us, beside the trail we were following, stood a big old
pine-tree, the upper half of which was dead. As we passed this tree
there came one of those sudden, whirling wind-storms so common in the
mountain-country; the top of the tree was twisted off and cast upon the
ground close to old Joe’s quarters. The startled mule sprang forward,
Squeaky’s horse sprang backward, and the result was, naturally, that
the head-stall of the bridle broke. At the same moment we were assailed
by a vicious, spiteful blast of sand and small pebbles, which stung
our faces so that everyone instinctively lowered his head and threw up
one arm as a protection. The squall lasted only a quarter of a minute,
but in that quarter-minute Bates and Squeaky seized the opportunity
they had doubtless been waiting for and went off down-wind with the
dust-cloud. When we looked up again they were just disappearing into
the woods behind us, lying flat upon their horses’ backs to avoid the
bullets they evidently expected to be sent after them.

It was uncommonly well done on their part, I am bound to admit. I had
not given Bates, at any rate, credit for such promptness of action.

Jack’s first impulse was to fulfil their expectations by sending an
experimental bullet after them. He half raised his rifle; but on
second thought he lowered it again, and turning to us, said:

“Well, after all, I believe that that is the best way out of it. They
won’t trouble us any more. We’ll inform the authorities, and if they
want to go after them they can do so. I’m sorry for Bates, though;
he’ll live to be hanged, I’m afraid.”

“I wish he had escaped before,” said Percy. “Now that he has gone off
again with Squeaky there’s no telling what scrape he will be led into
next. It is a pity we didn’t tell him we were going to let him escape.”

“I’m sorry too,” Jack responded; “but we acted to the best of our
judgment. I don’t think we are to blame. There is one thing:--he may
have been so badly scared by the prospect of going to prison that he
may conclude to part company with Squeaky at the first opportunity.”

“Do you suppose they will go back to the hiding-place?” I asked.

“I doubt it,” replied Jack. “They will know that we shall give
information of the place as soon as we get to town, and that somebody
will probably set out at once to recover the horses, when they might
be caught like rats in a trap. They are more likely, I think, to get as
far away as they can from the place. Come on. Let us jog along. We must
get in before sunset, if possible.”

The citizens of Bozeman were accustomed, I suppose, to the sight of
rough-looking strangers riding through their streets; and we were
rough-looking enough, surely, with our elbows showing through our
coat-sleeves and our knees through our trousers, with our hair down
below our collars, and our faces so sunburned that Jack and Percy
looked like a pair of Mexicans, while I was about the colour of the
rising moon. At any rate, nobody took any notice of us as we rode along
the main street of the little town to the post-office, and there pulled
up.

Jack dismounted and went in, returning in a few minutes with a handful
of letters, and we then passed on through the town and encamped upon
the stream just outside. There were three or four letters for each
of us. Eagerly, and with a bit of a tremour, Percy and I tore open
the envelopes, one after the other, glanced at the contents, and
simultaneously heaved such a big sigh of satisfaction that Jack looked
up.

“All right?” he asked.

“All right,” we replied together.

“Good!” said he. “Same here.”

After which laconic dialogue, silence ensued for the space of half an
hour, while we read and re-read the welcome letters from home.

Letters from home! Nobody knows their right value until he reads them
five thousand miles away from the hand that wrote them.

It was plain that my parents had great confidence in Jack, for they
expressed no anxiety on my account, though they did intimate that
it was rather a long time since they had heard from me. They also
suggested that it was about time we came home again, though, if there
should be a really good reason for our not returning at once, we were
given permission to stay on.

They were too wise, however, to leave the question of the goodness of
the reason to our prejudiced and immature opinions; Jack was to be the
sole and only judge.

Jack, we found, had a letter from Percy’s father repeating these
instructions, and having read it, he sat silent for five minutes,
thinking, while Percy and I fidgeted about, waiting for his decision.
At length he delivered judgment.

“Well, you fellows,” said he, regretfully, “I suppose you must go home.”

“Oh, no!” we both exclaimed together. “Not yet.”

“My instructions are to send you home,” Jack went on, “unless there is
a good reason against it; and I’m afraid there’s no good reason. We’ve
had a jolly outing; but from a business point of view it has resulted
in nothing. From the day we started to this present moment we haven’t
seen so much as a speck of gold.--What’s up?”

It was no wonder he asked what was up; for Percy, springing from the
ground as suddenly as though he had just discovered that he was sitting
on a nest of red ants, dived his hand into his trousers pocket, and
then, holding it out, palm upwards, exclaimed, “What’s that?”

“Where did you get that?” cried Jack, full of excitement in a moment.

“I found it in a pot-hole in the bed of the creek, close to that
curious rock in the horse-thieves’ hiding-place.”

“You did!”

Jack took the little nugget; looked it over and over; took out his
pocket-knife and cut little nicks in it; and then, for several
seconds, stood staring hard at nothing; while we stood silently by,
staring hard at him.

Presently he heaved a big sigh, shut up the knife with a snap, and said
quietly, but with much decisiveness:

“I’m going back.”

“Then so are we,” said Percy.


[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIII

THE CLEANING OF THE POT-HOLES


“No, no,” said Jack. “I think you ought to go home. Besides, it’s too
dangerous. I don’t like the responsibility of taking you back there.”

“But look here, Jack,” Percy persisted. “We are given leave to stay if
there is a good reason for staying; and surely we have a good enough
reason now. When we set out from Golconda our chief object was to help
you to find gold, and here is not only the best, but the only real
chance we have had. Then again, as to the danger, the only danger is
from Squeaky, and in my opinion we run less risk from him now than we
did in the beginning, for he is disarmed,--for the present, at any
rate,--and, besides that, we know what to expect of him, and we will
keep on the lookout accordingly. I don’t think he will catch us again.”

“There’s another thing,” said I. “It is a great deal more dangerous
for you to go by yourself than it is for all three to go together. You
can’t prospect by day and stand guard by night.”

“But----”

“Hold up!” exclaimed Percy, cutting in before Jack could get any
farther. “I’ll tell you what we’ll do--if Tom will agree. As Tom
says, you certainly can’t prospect by day and stand guard by night;
you’d wear out in two days. Well, we may not be much to brag of as
prospectors, but we can stand guard just as well as anybody; and here
is what I propose to do: We’ll go back to the thieves’ den; we’ll
carefully examine the whole valley to make sure that Squeaky hasn’t
returned,--though as to that, we should see his tracks, because, you
remember, it rained as we came out,--and if he is not there, which he
won’t be, I’m pretty sure, Tom and I will take it in turn to stand
guard in that little fortification, day and night, and night and day;
we’ll just live there; and I’d like to see Squeaky or anybody else pass
those bars while we are squinting at them through the loopholes with a
rifle in our hands. There! What do you say, Tom?”

“I’m agreed,” said I, briefly.

“Then what do you say, Jack?”

“I say you’re a bully good pair of fellows, and I’m ever so much
obliged to you, and I accept your offer. Back we go, all three of us.”

“Hurrah!” shouted Percy. “When?”

“To-morrow morning, if possible. But we must hustle, for we have plenty
to do before then. Let me think.”

Our captain stood silent for a minute, and then, in a quick, decisive
manner, issued his orders.

“I must go,” said he, “and hunt up the sheriff and tell him about those
horses. If he’ll go back with us, so much the better. While I’m doing
that--and there’s no telling how long it will take me--you must go and
buy some hay--the grass here is no good--and a small sack of oats, and
give the mules and horses a good feed. When you have done that, go to a
store--the one where the post-office is--and buy two fifty-pound sacks
of flour and twenty-five pounds of sugar, and wait there until I join
you. While you are waiting, buy some writing-paper and write home.
That’s all. Off you go!”

In the course of an hour or so we had fulfilled these commands, and
had each of us written a long letter home, when Jack joined us in the
store. He had been obliged to wait for some time in the sheriff’s
office, and had himself utilised the time by writing letters.

“It’s all fixed,” said he. “A deputy sheriff is coming with us; he will
come to our camp the first thing to-morrow morning, and we’ll all go
together.”

This was very satisfactory; we felt that we should have the law on our
side, and if there was any shooting to be done, the deputy would be the
one to do it, which, I must confess, was a very comforting reflection.

It was a great satisfaction to me, therefore, when, soon after sunrise,
the deputy appeared, a thin, wiry man, with a hooked nose and high
cheek-bones; and not only he, but another man, a burly fellow with a
black beard. A determined-looking pair they were, and I thought I would
a good deal rather have them on my side in a fight than against me.

We set off at once, and soon after midday of the second day we were
back again on the hog-back.

As we went down the dry watercourse, the bearded man, looking upward
at the rock which overhung the edge of the chasm, remarked:

“That there rock up there, if it was to fall down, would block this
passage pretty neat. A man ’ud need stand from under if he didn’t want
to be squeezed out as flat as the king of trumps.”

“That’s what,” replied the deputy. “Looks as if a man might shove it
down with his foot, too, don’t it? Hallo! Up that way, eh?”--as Jack,
who was leading, turned to the right and began to go up the waterway.

We ascended the slope, waded through the tunnel, which greatly excited
the astonishment of the two men, and went on part way down the second
dry watercourse, but as we turned the corner which brought us in sight
of the bars Jack pulled up, and addressing the men, said:

“There’s a set of bars here, and a little stone fort just beyond.
If the men have come back, and if they have any arms, that is where
they’ll be.”

“Very well,” said the deputy, calmly, “then it’s my business to turn
them out. It’s no concern of you boys; so you can keep out of range.
Just stay here while I go down.”

Without more ado he stepped round the corner, stood for a minute with
his cocked rifle in his hand gazing earnestly at the loopholes, and
then marched straight down the middle of the ravine, climbed over the
bars, and scrambled up into the little fort.

“Nobody here,” said he, jumping down again; and coming back to the bars
he let them down for us to pass through.

It was an extremely plucky thing to do, in my opinion. I know that
nothing would have induced me to face those loopholes. But the deputy
seemed to be absolutely without fear; I myself, standing in safety
around the corner, was a great deal more afraid for him than he
appeared to be for himself. He was taking his life in his hands, for
all he knew, and yet he did it as calmly as though it were part of an
ordinary day’s work. He was an uncommonly plucky fellow, that deputy.

We were soon at the exit of the gully, and there Jack once more
requested a halt. Going forward a short distance, he examined the
ground carefully, and then called out: “It’s all right. Nobody has been
down here.”

At the mouth of the gully there lay a fan-shaped bed of sand, brought
down by the overflow of the spring above. The rain of three or four
days ago had been heavy enough to send a thin stream of water over it,
obliterating all the old tracks and leaving it perfectly smooth. There
was not a foot-mark or a hoof-mark upon it, old or new.

This was a very satisfactory discovery, and we rode on down into the
valley with a great accession of confidence.

“Well!” exclaimed the deputy, as he issued from among the trees and
surveyed the little valley with its surrounding wall, “if this isn’t
the very finest ready-made corral for the horse-thief business ever I
saw, call me a horse-thief myself!”

“And how they ever come to find it beats me!” added his companion.

“Some hunter or prospector, maybe, hiding from the Indians in among the
rocks up above there, got into the stream to cover his tracks, and so
found the tunnel,” suggested the deputy.

“That’s it, likely,” said the other. “But there’s deer in here too. I
see a bunch of ’em down at the far end now. How’d they get in? Same
way?”

“Same way, I guess, unless they tumbled in. The horses is down there
too, I see; we may as well go and round ’em up right away. It isn’t
more ’n two o’clock, and we may just as well dig out at once. We’ll
make ten miles on the back track before night.”

“Then,” said Jack, “while you are getting up the horses, we three
will make a tour of the valley to see if there is any way but this of
getting in or out. Come on, you fellows; if we set off at once we can
make the round before the others are ready to leave.”

Our survey, which occupied about an hour, disclosed the fact that,
excepting at two points, the wall surrounding the valley was at least
forty feet higher than the tops of the trees which grew upon the slopes
below it. The first of these exceptions was immediately behind the
Mushroom Rock. There the bank extended from the foot of the rock up
to within twenty feet of the top of the wall; if one had a ladder of
that length he might get out there. The second exception was at the
cañon, where the stream left the valley; but as to getting out in that
direction, it seemed as impossible as it would be to fly over the wall
itself. The gorge was crowded with great boulders fallen from above,
between which rushed the foaming stream--the maddest, fiercest little
river I ever saw. None but a man in the last straits of desperation
would ever think of attempting the passage; he would be pounded to
death in five minutes, almost to a certainty.

The result of this tour was most gratifying to us; it proved
conclusively that if Squeaky should entertain the idea of paying us
a visit, he could not come in except by the “high road,” and as long
as we occupied the fort he could not come that way either without our
leave. It was therefore with perfect confidence in our ability to take
care of ourselves that we watched the departure of our two friends,
and, accompanying them as far as the bars, shouted “Good-bye!” to them
as they rode off round the corner, with the clattering herd of stolen
horses going on before.

“Now,” said Jack, “we will go to work systematically, and we’ll begin
by setting a guard. Tom, will you go on from now till supper-time?”

“All right,” said I, promptly.

“You and I, Percy,” he continued, “will see if we can’t improve this
barrier, so that nobody can come in without making a noise. I think I
know how it may be done. Come with me. Ulysses shall stay with you,
Tom.”

As I took my station in the fort, the other two walked off down the
gulley, and soon afterwards I heard above my head the sound of an axe;
they were chopping wood up there for some reason or other. Presently
Jack appeared upon the edge of the ravine, called out, “Look out,
below!” and then, crash! came a small dead pine-tree to the bottom of
the gully on the upper side of the bars. Two others followed, when
Percy came down again, and having arranged the three trees so that they
lay side by side, completely covering the whole width of the bed of
the gorge, he looked up and shouted, “All right, Jack, send down the
rest!” Down came three more trees, which were placed upon the top of
the others, and the bars were then restored to their places. It was a
great addition to our defences. The trees, arranged with their butts
down-hill, presented a mass of brittle points to any intruder, and
nobody could possibly climb over them or remove them without making
a noise loud enough to arouse the sentinel if he should happen to be
dozing; and as it was our intention that the sharp-eared Ulysses should
always be a member of the guard, we were satisfied that now, at any
rate, neither Squeaky nor anybody else could pass the bars without our
permission.

This abatis being completed, Jack and Percy went off to arrange the
camp, selecting a position in a bunch of trees a little to one side of
the mouth of the gully, and soon after sunset Percy came up to relieve
guard and to give me an opportunity to get my supper.

While I was thus engaged, Jack explained to me the course he proposed
to follow, and the arrangement of the order of guard-mounting, of which
he was to take his share at night; after which, leaving Percy and
Ulysses to keep the first watch, he and I retired to bed.

Until all these preliminaries had been settled, Jack did not so much as
mention the word “gold,” but next morning, soon after sunrise, while I
took my place as sentinel for the day, he and Percy, who, as the finder
of the nugget, naturally accompanied him to show him the place, went
off together for the first day’s prospecting.

The stream, as I think I have mentioned, had cut for itself a little
groove in the solid stone floor of the valley, while the floor itself,
for a space of twenty feet on either side of the groove, had been laid
bare by occasional freshets. Upon this level, smooth-swept surface
stood the Mushroom Rock.

How it ever came there was a puzzle. It could not have rolled down
the mountain, for, as Jack at once discovered, it was composed of
two different kinds of stone, the lower being a sandstone, the upper
a granite rock, and, of course, had it fallen from the mountain the
pieces would have come apart in doing so. Jack’s solution of the
problem appeared to be the only reasonable one. He said it must be one
of those vagrant rocks known as “erratic boulders,” which had been
carried here during the glacial period, and had been left standing
when the ice melted away under it. That such a top-heavy rock should
not have upset on the journey was hard to believe, but, in all
probability, the stem had been originally as large in circumference as
the cap--larger, perhaps--but being of softer material it had worn away
in the course of ages more rapidly than the upper part.

Percy led the way to the spot where he had found his gold button, and
pointed out to Jack the curious round hole in the bed of the stream
from which it had come. There were several of these pot-holes, all of
them, as it happened, down-stream from Mushroom Rock. They had been
formed by the rattling around in them of a pebble, the hole ever
growing larger and the pebble ever becoming smaller, until at last in
the unequal contest the latter had been worn out entirely. Some of the
holes were large enough to hold a bucketful of water; it must have
taken hundreds of years and worn out hundreds of pebbles to make them.

Having inspected these pot-holes, and having found that each one of
them had its little bed of black sand lying in the bottom, Jack said:

“Well, Percy, the first thing to be done is to gather as much as we
can of this black sand and test it for gold. The greater part of the
gold--if there is any--will be below the sand; so the holes must be
scraped out perfectly clean.”

Percy agreed that this was undoubtedly the proper course; but having
come to this decision without any trouble they were next confronted by
the question,--How were they to do it? It would be an everlasting task
to pick up the sand in pinches between one’s finger and thumb, and even
then it would be impossible to clear the holes entirely of the residue
which they expected to be the most valuable, if not the only valuable,
part. Jack’s inventive mind hit upon the means of getting out the bulk
of the sand. He ran back to the camp, and returning with one of our
spoons in his hand, he bent the head of this domestic implement at
right angles to the handle, thus forming of it a kind of scoop.

Selecting as the first to be tested the hole in which Percy had found
the nugget, he went down upon his hands and knees and ladled up a
spoonful of the deposit. Up came the spoon, brimming with sand, but the
moment it reached the surface the current whisked away the contents,
and the spoon was empty. This process had every appearance of being a
failure.

“Hold up a second,” cried Jack; and off he ran once more to the camp,
returning directly with a small tin cup in his hand. This he set in the
bottom of the hole and filled by means of the spoon, and then, taking
it up with the palm of his hand covering the top, he emptied it into
the gold-pan which Percy was holding in readiness.

So far, so good; but presently Jack had scraped out all that the spoon
would take up, and still there was a good deal of material left at
the bottom of the hole. In turn they peered down through the water,
persuading themselves that they could detect a yellow shimmer about the
residue--though the ripple and flash of the stream rendered it very
uncertain whether they were right or not--but scrape and scrape as they
might, they could get up no more of the sand. The matter could not, of
course, be left in this unsatisfactory state;--but what were they to do?

For some time they sat side by side upon the edge of the stream, like
a pair of pelicans waiting for a fish, trying to think of some means
of clearing out the hole, until, presently, Percy slapped his knee and
exclaimed:

“I know, Jack, how we can do it! Do you remember, in the story of ‘Ali
Baba and the Forty Thieves,’ how Ali’s brother’s wife put some tallow
on the bottom of the pot she lent him to measure his money with, and
how a piece of gold stuck to the tallow? Well, let us take a lump of
deer’s fat and press it down all over the bottom of the hole; it will
pick up everything there is there.”

“That’s a great idea,” said Jack. “But I’m afraid, if we use fat,
we shall have a great deal of trouble in getting rid of the grease
afterwards. An old prospector once told me that. And besides, grease
floats, and is apt to carry off the gold with it. Isn’t there anything
else we can use?”

“Dough,” suggested Percy, thoughtfully.

“H-m. Dough would do perhaps,” said Jack, dubiously, “but I expect it
would be about as bad as grease as far as getting the gold out of it
again is concerned. Think again.”

“Clay,” said Percy.

“That’s the stuff!” exclaimed Jack, jumping up. “All hands turn loose
and hunt for clay!”

I have said before that Jack did not profess to know much about
gold-washing. Had his friend, the old prospector, been at hand, he
would have told him that the extraction of gold from clay was a process
of notorious difficulty and tediousness; but of this fact Jack was
ignorant,--very fortunately for him, as it turned out. “A little
learning is a dangerous thing,” perhaps, but, strange to say, the
littleness of Jack’s learning in the art of gold-washing proved to be
most advantageous to him.

The two clay-hunters had not far to seek. On the bare stone beneath the
Mushroom Rock they found a fair supply of some white material which
they took to be clay--it was soft and sticky, and would therefore suit
their purpose excellently,--and gathering all they could find they
carried it to the edge of the stream, where Jack, going down again upon
his knees, made up a ball as big as his two fists, dropped it into the
pot-hole, and kneaded it about all over the bottom until he supposed it
must have picked up everything there was down there. He could not see
how the process was working, for the water turned “milky” the moment
the clay was put into it.

Percy having returned the black sand from the pan to the cup, Jack
fished up the clay ball, which being now in a slimy condition concealed
anything it might contain, dropped it into the pan, and filled the pan
with water. As the clay gradually dissolved, he poured away the muddy
water and renewed the supply, repeating the process many times, until
at length the soft material had been all washed away and the water
remained clear.

[Illustration: “OUT CAME A LITTLE PATCH OF YELLOW GOLD.”]

Percy, gazing into the pan as Jack held it up, concluded that they had
had all their trouble for nothing, for the only result appeared to be
a further supply of that ever-intruding black sand,--he was tired of
black sand,--but Jack, telling him to have a little patience, poured
away nearly all the water, and then, holding the pan almost upright,
he, by a dexterous turn of the wrist, set the sand trickling from
left to right along the hollow where the bottom of the pan turned up to
form the side.

And then, like the passing away of an eclipse of the sun, the black
shadow moved to one side, and out came a little patch of yellow
gold,--a teaspoonful.


[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIV

HIGH TIME TO LEAVE


Glancing at his companion, Percy, rather to his alarm, saw that Jack’s
face was quite pale, his eyes wide open and staring, and that, though
the day was cool, the perspiration was running down his cheeks. The
fact was that Jack was taken with a brief but sharp attack of that
curious disease known as “the gold fever.” To Percy the amount of gold
in the pan was no more than he had expected; but Jack, on the other
hand, was well aware that a spoonful of gold to one small pan of “dirt”
was something extraordinary.

“Percy,” he burst out, in a high state of excitement, “this is
tremendous! Perfectly tremendous! There is fifty times--a hundred
times--as much gold in that pan as I expected to see. There must be a
vein of extraordinary richness somewhere about here. We must set to
work to find it.”

“I’m ready,” responded Percy, catching something of his companion’s
excitement. “But how are we to set to work? I don’t know where to look
for it, nor what to look for.”

“First of all,” replied Jack, “we’ll clean out all the pot-holes, and
test them, one at a time, to see how they compare for richness with
the first one. After that we’ll test the soil on both banks, and after
that--well, after that we’ll see. Will you just go over to the camp and
bring down the wash-pan, a tin plate, and another spoon, while I try to
get rid of a little more of this black sand in the pan?”

Percy was soon on hand with the desired articles, when Jack set him to
work scouring the plate and the wash-pan with sand in order to remove
any particles of grease there might be adhering to them. This being
done, the gold was turned into the plate, and the pair, each armed
with a bent spoon, applied their labour to clearing out the next two
pot-holes; depositing all the black sand in the wash-pan, and dabbing a
clay ball over the bottom of each hole. Jack then proceeded to extract
the gold from the clay balls, while Percy cleaned out hole number
four. In this manner they worked their way down-stream until they had
cleaned up fourteen holes, each one of which yielded more or less gold,
though, as a rule, the quantity decreased as they descended. There
were only three holes left, but by this time the supply of clay had
given out, and Percy therefore went back to look for more. There was no
more where they had found the original deposit, but a few steps away,
still beneath the cap of the Mushroom Rock, he found another heap which
he gathered up and carried back to the stream. This lot of clay, he
observed, had a reddish tinge, whereas the other had been almost pure
white; but though he noticed the fact he thought nothing of it, and set
to work on the last three holes without delay.

To the surprise both of Jack and himself none of these three holes
produced a scrap of gold--not a “colour.”

“That is curious,” remarked Jack. “But I suppose the first fourteen
holes are so arranged in the bed of the creek as to intercept all the
gold that comes down. Are you sure that you cleaned up the last three
as thoroughly as you did the others?”

“I believe so,” replied Percy, “but I’ll do them over again and make
sure.”

“One’s enough,” said Jack. “Do the first of the three.”

The result was the same, however. They got black sand, but not a speck
of gold could they see, even with the aid of the magnifying-glass which
Jack produced from his pocket.

“Well,” said he, “then I suppose that is all the gold we are going to
get out of the creek, so let us go ahead and try the soil on the banks
to see if the vein it comes from is on this side or that, or from the
mountain which supplies the creek itself.”

Percy was about to assent to this proposal, when a sudden chill in the
atmosphere caused them both to look up. The sun was going down.

“Why, just look at the sun!” Percy exclaimed. “I’d no idea it was so
late.”

“Neither had I,” responded Jack. “We’ve been so busy that I forgot all
about the time. Come, let us get back to camp.”

“Poor old Tom!” said my chum, remorsefully. “There he has been, perched
up in his sentry-box all day, and not a scrap of dinner has he had.
He’ll think we’ve forgotten him.”

“If he does, he’ll be right,” said Jack, laughing. “Poor old chap,
though, I’m sorry. Here, Percy, I’ll carry the things; you run on and
let him out.”

I did think they had forgotten me, I confess. All day long I had stood,
or sat, at my post, with nothing to do but whistle and talk to Ulysses.
Noontime came, but no dinner. Should I run down to the camp and get
something to eat? No, I shouldn’t. I was here to keep watch, dinner or
no dinner, and watch I would keep if I got none for a week. There was
one way, I knew, by which I could make my companions come flying to my
relief, namely, by firing my rifle; but that, I thought, would not be
fair; it would alarm them unnecessarily. I remembered, besides, the
fable of the shepherd boy who called “wolf” when there was no wolf.
No; I must stick it out. And stick it out I did, though such a long,
tedious day I never spent before.

But when Percy came running up the gully, and, clambering into the
fort, with one breath apologized for forgetting me, and in the next
told me how it happened, I forgave them. And when, going down to the
camp, I saw the little heap of gold in the tin plate, I forgave them
still more. I did not wonder that they had forgotten me for I should
certainly have done the same by them.

“What do you suppose it is worth, Jack?” I asked, as I stirred up the
wet and shining heap with my finger. “Thirty or forty dollars?”

Jack laughed. “Three or four hundred is nearer the mark, I expect,”
said he. “Just lift it.”

The tin plate was standing in the gold-pan, and when I went to take it
up I thought for the moment they must be stuck together; it was so much
heavier than I had anticipated.

“Why,” said I, “it must weigh two pounds.”

“Just about,” replied Jack; “tin plate, black sand, and all; and so
I make a guess that the gold is worth four hundred dollars or so,
reckoning gold at eighteen dollars the Troy ounce, as they do here.”

It seemed impossible; such a little heap.

“But, Jack,” said I, as the discomforting thought suddenly occurred to
me, “suppose it should not be gold at all. How do you know it isn’t
copper?”

“Oh, there’s no mistaking gold when you’ve once seen it,” replied Jack.
“This stuff is gold, all right; I have no doubt about it at all. But
still, if you like, I’ll test it and make certain, just to set your
mind at rest, and to satisfy you that we haven’t put in ten hours’ hard
labour to-day on a wild-goose chase.”

Stepping over to the baggage, Jack hunted out an old cigar-box in
which were a tiny porcelain cup and a little glass-stoppered bottle,
the latter containing nitric acid. Pouring a little of the acid into
the cup, Jack dropped a scrap of the gold into it, and raking some hot
ashes from the fire he set the cup upon them. Soon the acid began to
simmer, and for five minutes it continued to do so, without, however,
producing the slightest effect upon the metal; nor did the liquid
itself change colour.

“It is gold, all right,” said Jack, removing the cup. “Now, I’ll just
show you what would have happened if it had been copper.”

With his knife he cut a shaving from a copper rivet, dropped the
fragment into the cup, and replaced the cup upon the ashes. In an
instant the acid attacked the copper, and pretty soon it had eaten it
all up, turning itself a beautiful green colour in the process.

“You see,” said Jack, “the copper can’t stand against this powerful
acid, whereas the gold doesn’t care a rap for it. Gold will hold its
own against any single acid; you must make a mixture of two of them
before you can dissolve ‘the royal metal,’ as it is called. So that
question is settled. We have found gold, without doubt. The next thing
to find is the place it came from.”

Until bedtime that evening we sat together in the sentry-box talking
over our find and arranging the programme for the morrow, and next
morning, Percy, whose turn it was to go on guard, went off up the
gully,--wisely taking his dinner with him,--while I accompanied Jack
down to the creek.

Above the Mushroom Rock the bed of the stream was cumbered with
boulders fallen from the mountain, but in between them were many
crevices and hollows containing more or less sand and small gravel.
These little depositories we examined carefully, picking up the residue
by means of the red clay, of which we had a good supply left over from
the day before, but in none of them was there so much as a colour of
gold. At length we had worked up close to the circular basin which the
stream, falling from the cliff above, had worn in its hard stone bed,
and there, just below the basin, we found a natural “riffle,” as Jack
called it; a little ledge two inches high running across the stream,
with an accumulation of sand on its upper side.

This sand Jack proceeded to clear out with his spoon, but as we had
again used up our stock of clay, he sent me back to the old place to
look for more. There was very little left, but I managed to collect a
double handful, including a small amount of the white material which
I scraped up with my knife, and carrying it back to the scene of
operations I handed it over to my chief. This time we did find gold,
a small amount, certainly, but enough to convince Jack of what he had
suspected all along, namely, that the vein was somewhere upon the
mountain above the wall.

“We shall have to make a ladder,” said he, “and set it up on top of the
bank there in order to get up the wall; a ladder twenty feet long will
do, I think. But before we do so we will test the soil on both banks of
the creek to make sure that the gold did come from up-stream, and not
from the mountain on either side.”

As we fully expected, our tests of the soil, and we made many of them,
were unproductive; the vein, we felt certain, was somewhere on the
mountain in which the stream had its source.

With that belief impressed upon our minds we turned to, forthwith, to
build a ladder. Carrying a couple of long poles to the highest point of
the bank, and setting them against the wall, we next cut into strips
the elk-hide which had once served as a door to the cabin, and with
the thongs bound cross-pieces to the uprights every two feet of their
length, making by these means a rough but serviceable ladder.

Though by this time it was getting on towards sunset, we scrambled
up to the top of the wall to make a brief survey of the country we
proposed to prospect; and a tremendous task, it seemed to me, we had
set ourselves. Dozens of gullies, big and little, wide and narrow,
straight and crooked, led down to the creek, in any one of which, and
in any part of any one of which, the vein might lie concealed; a vein
perhaps no wider than one’s hand. It looked to me very much like a
hopeless task. Jack, however, did not seem to be disconcerted by the
outlook.

“We’ll begin to-morrow,” said he, “and take these gullies one at a time
and search them thoroughly. It is my belief that the vein is composed
of some soft material which washes away easily, and that we shall find
it, when we do find it, in some deep crevice; for, as you will have
noticed, all the gold we have washed out yet has been entirely free
of any quartz or other rock, or of vein-matter of any kind--rather
unfortunately, for we have no sample of the rock to go by. As it is, we
shall have to bring down specimens of any veins we may find, grind them
up between two stones, and wash them like any other gravel.”

“It seems to me, Jack,” said I, “that it might take us a year to go
over all the country that drains into this creek; there is so much of
it.”

“I hope not,” replied Jack, “because we can’t give it more than a month
at most. It will be high time for you fellows to be going home; and
what is more, at this altitude we are likely to have a snow-storm any
day, which would cover up the country and stop our prospecting anyhow.
Let us go back to camp now. To-morrow, while you are on guard, Percy
shall go and bring in a deer, so that we may have a good supply of meat
on hand, and I will come up here and make a preliminary survey, in
order that we may get to work in a systematic, businesslike manner.”

This plan was duly followed out, and for twenty days thereafter Percy
and I, taking it turn about, accompanied Jack up the mountain,
tramping up and down all day long, prying into all its cracks and
crannies, and bringing back every night one or more samples of rock for
the sentinel of next day to grind up between two stones. And a blessing
it was to the sentinel to have such an occupation to fill up the time;
for, as it was not necessary that he should keep his eye glued to the
loophole without intermission, he had a large amount of spare time on
his hands.

But of all the dozens of samples we ground up not one showed so much
as a trace of gold. It was very disheartening. To Jack, especially, it
was a great disappointment. After our astonishing find in the pot-holes
his hopes had been so high; he had felt so sure that before next spring
the mine at Golconda would be going again, full blast; he was so full
of plans for the future, when he and his father and mother and sister
would be all living there together, that his disappointment at our
non-success was all the more keen. And now our time was almost up. The
threatening weather warned us that we must prepare to leave; and not
a vestige of a gold-vein had we found for all our searching. Poor old
Jack! He became more and more gloomy as the days went by; and what
with the hard work and the shortened allowance of sleep--for he always
took his share of night-watching--he was beginning to look quite gaunt
and careworn. Percy and I had less cause for worry and more time for
rest, but the work was beginning to tell upon us too. It was hard
enough in any case, tramping over the rocks at the heels of a leader so
eager and energetic as Jack, but the loss of one-third of one’s natural
sleep made it almost unbearable. Day after day we became more and
more tired; the tiredness seemed to accumulate, it became chronic; we
dragged our feet after us as we walked; and as to running, nothing less
than a ramping, raging grizzly bear could have induced us to run a step.

It was a good thing we had those samples of rock to grind up in the
daytime, or, I fear, without that occupation for mind and body there
would have been a very good chance of the sentinel being caught
napping, had there been anybody to catch him--which apparently there
was not;--for, all this time, we had seen no sign of Squeaky, and we
had come to the conclusion that he must have been scared out of the
neighbourhood altogether.

It was after supper on the evening of the twenty-first day of our stay
in the valley that Jack came to the sentry-box where Percy and I were
sitting over a little fire discussing our prospects, and after standing
thoughtfully warming his hands for a few minutes, he said, evidently
with much reluctance:

“Well, you fellows, the jig’s up. We must go. We’re all pretty well
worn out; and what’s more, there is a snow-storm brewing; and a heavy
snow might make it difficult to get out of the valley. We’ll put in one
more day here, and the next morning we’ll pack up and get out. I hate
to give up, but there’s nothing else for it that I see. We must go.”

“But look here, Jack,” said Percy. “It seems a pity to give up until we
are obliged to do so. Let us take a day off to-morrow and rest up. And
I believe we might leave off mounting guard at night if we all three
were to sleep here in the fort; Ulysses would never let anyone come
near us. Then we shouldn’t feel so desperately tired all the time, and
we could go on with our prospecting until it does snow.”

“That seems to me to be a pretty good idea,” I put in. “And if it
clouds up so that we feel sure that it is going to snow, why, then,
we’ll clear out at once. I vote that we don’t give in till we must.”

“You may be sure,” said Jack, “that I don’t want to give in any more
than you do; but I’m afraid it is going to snow very soon, and if it
does, that will be the end of our prospecting, for the ground won’t be
clear again till next spring. You have noticed, perhaps, how the wind
has been blowing from the south for the last two or three days; well,
it has chopped round to the north since supper, and that means snow
before long, I expect. In fact, I would get out to-morrow, but that
there are still two gullies I am anxious to inspect before we go. Percy
and I will each take one of them, and if we make an early start we can
give them a pretty thorough going over before dark. Then, whether we
find anything or not, I think we must pack up and leave next morning.
I’m really afraid of being caught down here by a snow-storm.”

“We ought to have some meat for the journey,” remarked Percy, who, as
cook, took charge of such matters; “there is hardly enough left for
three meals. How are we going to get it, if Tom is on guard, and I go
with you up on the mountain?”

“We’ll manage it this way,” replied Jack, after a moment’s hesitation.
“You shall take the smaller of the two gullies to-morrow, Percy, and
whether you have time to go over it all or not, you shall come back
here about the middle of the afternoon and go down to the lower end of
the valley and get us a deer; there are always deer to be seen down
there, and you ought to be able to get one before night.”

“Very well,” responded Percy. “I’ll do so. We must have meat for the
journey.”

“Yes. Three days’ supply, at least. It will probably take us that
length of time to get to Bozeman.”

According to this arrangement the pair set off at daylight next
morning, while I remained on guard in the sentry-box. The day passed
uneventfully, as usual, until about half-past four in the afternoon,
when Percy looked in upon me on his way down the valley, and having
handed me one sample of rock to grind, walked off again, his rifle over
his shoulder.

A quarter of a hour later, perhaps, I heard a shot. Ulysses, who was
lying stretched out beside me, cocked up one ear, but otherwise took no
notice. The next moment, however, to my great astonishment, he sprang
up, leaped out of the fort, and ran, helter-skelter, out of the gully.

I dropped my grinding-stone, seized my rifle, and sprang to the
loophole. There was nothing to be seen there. What, then, was the
matter with Ulysses? He must have heard something that I had not;
something to alarm him, too, or he would not have thus deserted his
post,--for the old dog, I believe, knew just as well as I did that he
was on guard.

I jumped down from the shelf and ran to the mouth of the gully, where
I stood still to listen. I could hear nothing; but, fearing that
Percy might be in need of help, I ventured to run on until I had
passed through the fringe of trees which interrupted my view of the
valley-bottom.

There, the first thing I saw was our herd of animals. They were close
to the camp, each one standing with his head held high and his ears
pointed forward, snorting and gazing down the valley. I looked in the
same direction, and, instantly, I, too, forgot that I was on guard. I,
too, deserted my post, and raced off down the valley.

About half a mile away, and on the far side of the stream, was Percy,
running, as never mortal boy ran before I should think, in my
direction. Close behind him, in full chase, was a bear--an immense
beast. It looked to me to be about the size of a full-grown steer,
though not so tall. Between Percy and me--but a good deal nearer to him
than to me--was Ulysses, going like a mad creature to the rescue.

I had not cleared half the distance between us when the conditions of
the chase were suddenly altered. The bear had come so close to Percy
that the fugitive, fearing to be caught the next moment, doubled like
a hare and ran back again towards the trees. The ponderous pursuer,
unable to check himself so quickly, ran on for several yards, but then,
doubling also, he was about to resume the chase in this new direction
when Ulysses, leaping the creek, and rushing up the opposite slope,
darted in like a flash and seized him by the hind leg. The enraged
beast whirled about and made a slap at Ulysses that would have torn
the dog in two had it taken effect. But our old friend was cunning as
well as brave. He let go and jumped away; and then the two stood, their
noses about six feet apart, eying each other like two gladiators; the
bear growling and showing all his formidable teeth, and Ulysses going
“G-rrr, g-rrr, n-yam, n-yam, n-yam,” as a dog does when he sees through
the parlour window another dog come into the front yard and scratch up
the grass as if it belonged to him.

This diversion, as I believe, saved Percy’s life. It gave him time to
reach a tree, up which he went like a demented squirrel.

Meanwhile I had come within fair range of the bear, and kneeling
down I took careful aim and fired. That my bullet struck the beast
was evident, for he roared with anger, and then, with an activity
surprising in so unwieldy an animal, he sprang at Ulysses. Ulysses,
however, knowing that in this case discretion was very much the better
part of valour, nimbly got out of the way, upon which the bear turned
short round and came charging at me.

My! How I did run! Nobody knows his own capabilities as a foot-racer
until he has undergone the experience of running away from a wrathful
bear, whose firm-set determination it is to tear him to pieces if he
can catch him.

Though Ulysses, the moment the bear turned his back, seized him
again by the leg, the big beast took no notice of him. Strong as a
bull, he dragged the dog after him with ease, and even with that
incumbrance hampering his movements he gained upon me at every stride.
Fortunately, having a good start, I succeeded in reaching the trees
while the pursuer was yet some distance behind; seeing which, the bear
gave up the chase and stopped again to slap at Ulysses.

I had dropped my rifle, as had Percy, also, I found; so, there we
were, on opposite sides of the little valley, each perched in a tree,
with a vengeful bear keeping strict watch and ward over us. I wondered
how long we should have to stay there; and I wondered also whether
Jack would presently come to our rescue. From the positions of the
two trees we occupied neither of us could see up the valley, and for
the same reason Jack would not be able to see us. He might, however,
observe Ulysses and the bear out in the open; though not unless he came
pretty soon, for the clouds were heavy that evening, and it was already
growing dark.

Two or three times both Percy and I made attempts to recover our
rifles, but our watchful antagonist would not permit it, each time
driving us back in haste to our places of refuge. The time wore on, and
the darkness rapidly increased, but at length, when it had become so
dark that I could no longer distinguish with certainty between the dog
and the bear, I saw through the branches of the trees a sudden flash
of fire, followed by the report of a rifle. Next I heard the joyful
barking of Ulysses, and directly afterwards the sound of Jack’s voice
calling to Percy. Down I scrambled from my tree, and running to the
spot whence the voice came, I found Jack standing over the body of the
bear, while Percy had just arrived from the opposite direction.

“Hallo, Tom!” exclaimed our captain in surprise. “You here too?”

“Yes,” said I, remembering for the first time that I was supposed to be
acting sentry. “I was obliged to come. I quite forgot, I confess, that
I was on guard, but I have no doubt I should have come just the same if
I had remembered. I had no time to think, as it happened, but all the
thinking in the world would have made no difference; I should have come
just the same.”

I then related to Jack the circumstances of the case, upon which, to my
relief, he remarked:

“I see. Yes, of course. You were quite right. You couldn’t do anything
else. I should certainly have done the same, even if I had known that
Squeaky was likely to be down on us in the next five minutes. Oh, yes;
you were perfectly right. I think, though, you had better find your
rifle and go back now. Percy and I will follow as soon as we have cut
out one of the bear’s hams.”

It was a long time before I could find my rifle, even with Percy’s
help, and in consequence, when I did at length get back to the fort, it
was so dark in the narrow cañon that I could not see my hand before my
face. However, I knew my way into the sentry-box well enough, and there
I took up my station again until, an hour or so later, Percy came up to
relieve me.

After I had had my supper, Jack and I carried all our blankets up to
the fort; for it was our intention to sleep there that night. We had
had a hard day and were very tired, and as we expected another day as
hard on the morrow we had decided to go without a sentinel for that
one night, trusting to the ever-watchful Ulysses to give us notice if
anyone should approach the bars.

For half an hour we sat about the little fire we had built inside
the fort, while Percy related to us how he had accidentally stumbled
upon the bear that day, and how the bear had charged upon him without
provocation--a very unusual thing. After which Jack explained his part
of the affair, telling us how, when he returned to camp, he had espied
Ulysses and the bear standing in the midst of the valley, and how,
guessing that Percy must be in trouble, he had run to help him,--never
thinking that he should find me there as well.

“You must have been in a pretty awkward position, Percy, about the time
Ulysses arrived,” said he.

“I was,” Percy responded. “I was badly scared, I can tell you. Ulysses,
old chap,” putting his arm around the dog, who was sitting with his
chin in the air, blinking at the fire, “whenever I get my share of that
gold we can’t find, you shall have a medal. Just you remember, now.”

“I’m afraid he’ll have to go without his medal, then,” said Jack;
“because we must get out of here to-morrow as early as possible. I
don’t like the look of things. I’m rather afraid the snow may catch us
down here. Come, let us turn in; we shall want all the sleep we can
get.”

It was still pitch-dark when Jack’s voice roused us next morning.

“Tumble up, you fellows, tumble up!” he cried. “No time to waste! Snow
in the air! We must dig out at once!”

He was right about there being no time to waste. Already the snow,
fluttering into the fort, was covering our beds with ominous rapidity,
and, to our dismay, when we jumped down from the ledge we felt--for we
could not see--that the ground was carpeted with snow a foot thick,
while the continuous pattering upon our hands and faces proclaimed only
too plainly that the storm we had feared was upon us in earnest.

As it would be useless to attempt to find the horses in the dark, we
set about the difficult task of getting breakfast first; nor was it
until we had finished that meal that there was daylight enough to
enable us to see clearly how hard it was snowing. Jack was alarmed.

“Percy,” he exclaimed, “run at once to the fort, bring down the
blankets, and then put the packs together. Tom, take a turn up the
valley and look for the horses. I will go down-stream. If you find
them, fire your rifle. I will do the same. Hurry!”

Away we all went, in three different directions; but Jack and I had not
gone far ere we heard the report of a rifle in the direction of the
cañon. Back we hurried at once, to meet Percy coming down to the camp
at a run. His face was pale, and he was so out of breath, more from
agitation seemingly than from exertion, that he could not speak.

“What’s the matter?” cried Jack, sharply, feeling a vague alarm at the
sight of Percy’s troubled countenance. “Anything wrong?”

“The horses are stolen!” he gasped.

Most boys who have played through a football season will remember the
sensation of being knocked over backwards by one of his opponents
taking him “in the wind” with the point of his shoulder. It was some
such sensation that Percy’s announcement produced upon us. It did
not knock us over, but it deprived us for the moment of the power of
speech. Only for a moment, however.

“How do you know?” asked Jack, as soon as he had recovered from the
first shock of this staggering news.

“The bars are down, and the dead trees are all pulled to one side,”
replied Percy. “They must have done it yesterday when Tom and I were
down the valley; and we didn’t notice it because of the darkness.
What’s to be done, Jack?”

“Done?” cried our leader. “Clap some bread and meat into our pockets,
and follow at once. I don’t suppose we can overtake them, but we must
get out of this place as fast as we can; the snow is coming down harder
than ever.”

Without more words we set off, and having toiled up the steep,
snow-cumbered cañon and waded waist-deep through the tunnel, we
carefully descended the water-slope and turned into the dry gorge.
But no sooner had we turned the corner than we stopped short, with an
exclamation of dismay; for a new misfortune, and one even more serious
than the loss of our horses, had overtaken us. The great wedge-shaped
rock had fallen, or had been upset, from above. The gorge was blocked.
We could not get out!


[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XV

A WAY OUT


Three shivering, miserable mortals were we, as we stood there in our
wet clothes contemplating the impassable rock which barred the way. Two
badly scared mortals were Percy and I, as we turned instinctively to
our leader for comfort.

“What’s to be done now, Jack?” asked the former, tucking his hands
beneath his arms to warm them. “There’s no getting over this thing.”

Then did our captain come out strong. If ever I get into such a
predicament again, give me a fellow like Jack for a leader. He knew
better than we did the danger of the position in which his bad
management--as he considered--had placed us; he was quite as much
alarmed as we were at the plight in which we found ourselves; but,
seeing that if he should give way to his fears his two followers
would instantly be plunged into the depths of despair, he assumed a
cheerfulness he was far from feeling, and with an air of assurance
which was most encouraging he answered Percy’s question as promptly and
decisively as though, far from being taken by surprise, he had been
thinking over the matter for a week beforehand. A very fine fellow was
our captain; though he would be the first to laugh at me for saying so.

“This rock must be about thirty feet high,” said he, contemplating the
obstruction in a calm, critical manner, as though it were some natural
curiosity, “and, as you see, it fits down so closely there is no
crawling under it. All we have to do, therefore, is to crawl over it.”

“That’s a good deal, though,” said Percy, brightening up a little,
however, under the influence of Jack’s example. “How do you propose
to do it? The rock leans over this way so much that we can’t possibly
climb up it.”

“We’ll bring up a thirty-foot pole,” replied Jack, “lean it against
the rock, and climb up that. Simple enough, eh? So, let us get back to
camp at once. You two shall transfer our baggage to the cabin, because
I think it quite probable that we shall have to stay here until the
storm is over, and a roof will be a good thing in this snow, and while
you are doing that I will go and cut the pole, which we will bring up
at once, so that, even if we don’t get out to-day, we may have it ready
when we want it.”

“But, Jack,” said Percy, “suppose we should not be able to bring the
pole up here. What then? Shall we--shall we--?”

“Shall we have to stay here all winter?” I blurted out, unable any
longer to keep down the momentous question we all of us had in our
minds.

“Stay here all winter?” cried Jack--and he actually managed to scare
up a laugh. “Not we! Why, Percy, where’s your American enterprise?
Where’s your English bull-doggedness, Tom? Do you think we’ll give in
at one failure? Not we, indeed! If we should be unable to get over this
rock, why, then, we’ll just go up our ladder and walk home over the
mountains. Give in! I should think not. We’re not babies; we’re men!”

That was a grand stroke of Jack’s: calling us men. I felt myself grow
two inches immediately; and Percy, taking his hands from under his
arms, and repressing his shivers as well as he could, straightened up
and exclaimed:

“Go ahead, Jack! You lead; we’ll follow!”

“Come on, then!” cried our captain.

Back we went at once, up the waterway, through the pool, and down to
the fort, where we picked up our blankets and carried them over to the
cabin; after which Percy and I busied ourselves in transporting the
rest of our baggage to the same haven, while Jack went off in search of
a pole which should be at once sufficiently long and not too heavy.

The better part of an hour passed ere we were ready to set out again,
by which time the snow had so increased in depth as to be up to our
knees, making the task of carrying the heavy pole one of great labour.
After innumerable pauses to rest and recover breath, and after a great
deal of manœuvring to coax the awkward burden around the corners, we at
length reached the pool. But there we encountered a new and unexpected
obstacle. We were met in the face by a rush of wind, which was driving
out of the mouth of the tunnel with force enough to make us stagger
under our load. It had been perfectly calm down in the valley when we
left it, and in the cleft in the rocks up which we had just come there
was no air stirring, but judging from the blast which came out of the
tunnel, we guessed that there must be a high wind sweeping over the
hog-back above our heads.

“Stop!” cried Jack. “You fellows wait here, while I go through and see
what it is like on the other side. From the look of things, I expect we
have got to get back to the cabin at once.”

We “up-ended” the pole and leaned it against the rocks, so that it
should not be buried in the snow, and then Jack, for the third time
that day, waded into the pool. In a short time he came splashing back
again, and reported, as we had expected, that there was a gale blowing
on the other side of the valley-wall.

“It’s no use to think of going on at present,” said he; “the snow is
drifting badly out there. We should only lose ourselves; and the result
of that would probably be that we should freeze to death or die of
exhaustion, tired as we are, and wet through as we have been all day.
We must make our way down to the cabin again as fast as we can.”

We accordingly retraced our steps; and it was well we turned back when
we did, or we might never have reached the little shanty at all. As we
were about to enter, Jack stopped and held up his finger.

“Hark!” he cried. “Do you hear that booming noise? The wind in the
pines. It will be down on us directly. Come in, and help me fasten the
waggon-sheet over the doorway.”

Such a storm as that which burst upon us five minutes later I never
saw before; and I shall be well content if I never see such another.
The wind leaped upon us like a wild beast, and instantly the whole
atmosphere seemed to go crazy. Our little, creaking cabin shook and
trembled so that the mud “chinking” fell out upon the floor; several
of the stones composing our chimney came tumbling into the fireplace;
three or four times our door was dashed from its fastenings--when the
room was filled with snow in an instant--and hard work we had to get it
back again.

The fierceness of the wind, and the whirling, stifling, never-ceasing
rush of the snow were enough to frighten the boldest. It was one of
those storms which drive the range-cattle headlong before them for
miles and miles, until the poor beasts give in, exhausted, and fall to
the ground, never to get up again; one of those storms which, catching
the solitary immigrant-waggon unprepared, pass on and leave it with
its occupants--men, women, and children, perhaps--and the horses which
pulled it, all stiff and dead together.

“This is a bad one, and no mistake,” said Jack, after one of our
periodical struggles to replace our door. “It is fortunate for us that
we have four stout walls and a roof to shelter us. If it was Squeaky
who upset that rock into the passage up above, he did us a good turn in
my opinion. If it had not been there to stop us, we should have been
caught half-way down the mountain; and that, I expect, would have been
the end of us. I don’t believe a man could live half an hour in this
storm if he were exposed to its full force.”

All the rest of that day we sat still or walked restlessly up and down
listening to the commotion outside, and all through the night we slept
in fitful snatches, roused now and then when a blast of extra power
burst in our door or sent crashing to the ground one of the trees on
the slope close behind the cabin. It was an anxious night; nor did we
get relief until midday next day, when the wind stopped as suddenly as
it had begun.

Jack stepped to the doorway and removed the waggon-sheet.

The sky was clearing rapidly, the snow had ceased to fall. Except for
a few drifts, the valley was swept clean, the mountain-tops were bare,
and the branches of the trees, which before had bent under the weight
of snow, had now shaken themselves free of their burden.

For a minute Jack stood in the doorway, silent, and frowning to
himself, and then, “Come over and look at the pass,” said he, and set
off across the valley.

The pass was gone--vanished! We could not tell even where it ought
to be, so completely was it filled up, and such a maze of drifts of
all shapes and sizes was there among the woods which bordered it. The
entrance--supposing we had found the right place--was buried under
fifty feet of snow.

I glanced at Jack, expecting to see him overwhelmed by this crowning
misfortune. But not a bit of it. He merely nodded his head in the
direction of the pass, and said: “No getting out that way seemingly.
Let us go and look at the ladder.”

But that way, too, was barred. Nature seemed to have made a dead set
at us. A freak of the wind had piled a great drift upon the top of the
wall just above the ladder, where it hung like a combing wave, ready
to fall at a touch to all appearance. Indeed, a large mass had already
fallen, breaking the ladder in two.

Our case seemed to me to be pretty desperate, and from the concerned
expression upon Percy’s face I guessed that he was of the same
mind. But upon Jack this accumulation of difficulties, instead of
casting him down, seemed to have the opposite effect; it aroused his
fighting-spirit.

“Give in!” he cried, just as though someone had suggested it, and
shaking his fist at the world in general. “Not if I know it! We’ll
find, or force, a way out somewhere! You see,” he went on, addressing
us, “some of these drifts are pretty sure to reach to the top of the
wall somewhere, and as soon as the snow has settled a bit, and after
the sun and frost have hardened the surface, we shall be able to get
about, and then we’ll make an exploring expedition. All we can do at
present is to go down to the cabin and make ourselves as comfortable as
we can for a few days. It is no good trying to get out while the snow
is soft, we should bury ourselves in the drifts.”

In spite of Jack’s heroic efforts to put a good face on the situation,
I confess that I, at least, felt much inclined to despair of being able
ever to climb out of the old crater by means of the unstable drifts,
while Percy, I have good reason to believe, felt much as I did about it.

How we should have scoffed at anyone who should have ventured to
suggest that anything could possibly happen to make us forget, even for
a moment, the pressing question of finding a way out of the valley! Yet
such an event did actually occur; and no later than the next morning.

When I first described the Mushroom Rock I mentioned, it will be
remembered, that the cap was split in two, and, that the pieces
overhung the stalk in such a manner as to make it appear that a strong
wind might blow them down. Appearances were deceitful, however, or the
late storm would certainly have upset them. But where the blustering
wind had failed, the sun and the frost, working in turns, succeeded.
The crack dividing the cap was drifted full of snow, and this snow the
sun next day reduced to a state of slush, the frost at night converting
it in turn into ice. The lateral pressure thus brought to bear upon
them by the ice was sufficient to move the pieces the quarter-inch or
so necessary to destroy their balance, and when we looked out of the
cabin door next morning, there were the two great rocks lying on their
backs--one of them bridging the creek.

Percy and I walked over to look at them, and as we stood beside the
fallen fragment which lay athwart the stream, our conversation--I
forget why--turned upon the subject of the pot-holes and the gold
button that Percy had found in one of them.

“That’s the hole,” said he, pitching a snowball into the water, “and I
should like to know why that one should have had a nugget in it while
the others had nothing but scales and grains.”

“What I should like to know,” said I, “is why we should find gold in
the pot-holes and nowhere else. Is there a goose around here that goes
about laying golden eggs and using these holes for nests? Perhaps she
has been along again by this time and laid another in your pot-hole.”

“Highly probable,” replied Percy, ironically. “I’ll look.”

As he spoke he stepped over to the spot and looked down into the hole.
To my great surprise he fell upon his knees, tucked up his sleeve, and
plunged his hand into the water.

“Look here!” he exclaimed, holding out a yellow lump in his dripping
fingers.

My imaginary goose had laid another egg; an egg three times as big as
the last one too.

We were nonplussed this time. If the presence of gold in the pot-holes
had been a puzzle to us before, what were we to think of the conjuring
trick that Nature had played upon us now? Without a word--for, indeed,
we had nothing to say--we hurried back to the cabin, outside which was
Jack, busy chopping wood. To him Percy held out his hand just as he had
done to me.

“Well, Percy,” cried the wood-chopper, straightening his back and
stretching himself, “what have you found this time?”

“This,” replied Percy, briefly.

Jack dropped the axe and took the nugget.

“Where did it come from?” he asked, opening his eyes wide.

Percy told him.

“What!” he exclaimed. “You found it in the same pot-hole that we
cleaned out a month ago? Well, that is the most astonishing thing I
ever heard of. Where can it have come from?”

As he talked he kept turning the nugget over and over, examining it on
every side, and presently, in a little crevice or fold, he espied a
tiny white streak. Taking out his pocket-knife he extracted a little
of this white material and thoughtfully spread it upon the palm of his
hand. It made a mark like white paint.

We two stood patiently waiting for him to offer some explanation of
this mysterious “find,” when, with startling suddenness, he cast his
knife upon the ground, slapped his leg, and burst into a great laugh; a
laugh half of amusement and half of annoyance.

“Ho, ho, ho!” he went, stamping about and clutching his back hair as if
he had been stung by a hornet. “Oh my, oh my, oh my! What a blundering
dunderhead I must have been never to have guessed it before! Here, give
me a hand with this pole, one of you,” picking up, as he spoke, the
butt end of a dead pine-tree which formed part of our heap of fire-wood.

“What are you going to do with it?” asked Percy, as he shouldered the
little end.

“Show you that vein, I hope,” replied Jack. “Come on!”

Down we went to the stream, and there we reared the pole on end and
leaned it against one piece of the prostrate cap, when Jack at once
shinned up it and stepped upon the top of the rock. In half a minute he
looked down, at us and said, in a rather excited tone of voice “Come
up!”

Up went Percy, with me close behind him, and soon we were standing at
our leader’s side.

“Look here!” said he.

About half the surface of the rock, originally its under side, was
covered with a layer of reddish, clay-like material some two inches
thick, across the middle of which ran a white streak about a span in
width. Going down upon his knees, Jack pointed out to us little flakes
and lumps of gold, showing in several places along the white streak.

“There is our gold-vein,” said he. “It has been lying under our noses,
or, rather, above our heads, all this time. The gold we got out of
the pot-holes with the help of the clay balls came out of the clay
balls themselves. With our own stupid hands we put the gold into the
pot-holes, and then ‘discovered’ it. Did ever such a thing happen
before? And to think that I never suspected it! No wonder we couldn’t
find the vein up in the mountain, when, just as likely as not, this
rock rode on a glacier down from Alaska or Hudson’s Bay, or anywhere
else you like, ages ago, when half this continent was covered with
ice.”

“Then that nugget I found this morning,” said Percy, “tumbled into the
water when the rock fell down.”

“Yes,” replied Jack. “And the water had not had time to wash it quite
clean. It was the little scrap of clay left sticking to it that showed
me where it came from.”

“I suppose this white streak probably runs across the other rocks as
well,” said I.

“Probably. We’ll soon see.”

The three rocks lay close together, and being all about the same height
there was no difficulty in stepping from one to the other. Each of them
was traversed by the same white line, which, like the first one, showed
scraps of gold in various places; one scrap, which I picked out with my
knife, being as big as the top of my thumb.

At last, then, we had found that elusive gold-vein; a small one,
indeed, but to all appearance a rich one; and having found it, we
determined to make the most of it.

That day, and the next three days as well, we spent upon the top of the
rock exposed to the full blast of the wintry wind--for the winter now
seemed to have set in in earnest,--each with a sheath-knife cutting a
trench along the line of the white streak, and carefully saving every
scrap of the frozen clay thus laboriously collected. By the time the
work was finished, we had accumulated some five hundred pounds of the
precious stuff, which we carried to the cabin and there proceeded to
wash, a double handful at a time, in the gold-pan; a slow and tedious
undertaking.

Our reason for doing this work in the house was that the little creek
had ceased to flow, being now frozen solid, and we were obliged in
consequence to resort to melted snow for washing and drinking purposes.
The iron pot was kept continuously upon the fire, and one of us was
constantly engaged in bringing in shovels full of snow with which to
feed it, in order to supply Jack’s insatiable demands for more water.

In the corner of the house we dug a hole two feet deep to serve as
a sink, and in this corner sat Jack, hour after hour, with his feet
planted on either side of the hole, washing “dirt” in the pan, pouring
away the muddy water into the sink, and saving the precious residue of
gold and black sand.

By the time all of the original five hundred pounds of clay had been
washed, we found ourselves in possession of about a tenth of that
amount of black sand, which was then all washed over again with the
greatest care. At last Jack declared that he was afraid to wash it any
more, for fear of losing some of the fine particles of gold; so our
labour was concluded when the mass had been reduced to about thirty
pounds’ weight, of which two-thirds, perhaps, was gold.

Percy and I were anxious to know what was the value of the little
heap; but to make the calculation was beyond our power, for we had
not the least idea of how many Troy ounces there might be in a pound
Avoirdupois; and gold, of course, is sold by Troy weight.

Jack said he thought he could calculate it, and with a burnt stick he
forthwith proceeded to work out the sum upon the waggon-sheet.

“In the first place,” said he, “there are twenty-nine thousand one
hundred and sixty-six Troy ounces in a ton of two thousand pounds
Avoirdupois.”

“How do you know?” asked Percy, promptly.

“Learnt it in a book on assaying,” replied Jack, with equal promptness.

“All right,” said Percy, “peg away, then.”

“We are supposing that we have twenty pounds of gold here,” Jack went
on. “Twenty pounds is one-hundredth part of a ton. H-m--h-m! Two
hundred and ninety-one ounces and a fraction Troy--say, two hundred and
ninety. Multiply that by eighteen. Gold is reckoned at eighteen dollars
an ounce up here in Montana, you know. There!” as he drew with his
burnt stick a line beneath the total.

“Oh, get out!” exclaimed Percy, when he saw the figure. “You don’t mean
to say that this little heap is worth five thousand two hundred and
twenty dollars!”

“Something of the sort,” replied Jack. “Of course there is a great deal
of guess-work about it, but I expect that my calculation is not far
out. I shouldn’t wonder if this heap, and the gold we got out of the
pot-holes, were to mount up to six thousand dollars, or even more.”

It was hard to believe that so small a heap could be worth so much; but
Jack seemed to be pretty confident, and so we took his word for it,
hoping he might turn out to be right.

That our treasure might be packed in handy form for travelling we
applied our time that evening to making little bags of canvas cut from
the waggon-sheet, and these having been packed tight and sewn up, they
were put into other bags made of buckskin, having thongs of the same
material attached with which to tie them to our belts.

“There,” said Jack, as he restored the needles and thread to the case,
and the case itself to his pocket, “now we are ready to get out as soon
as we can. We’ll try the drifts to-morrow. Those near the north end
look most promising. We’ll try them first.”

But, as it happened, we had no occasion to try the drifts after all.
Before we set out next morning, Percy suggested that it might be worth
while to look into the cleft in the valley-wall through which the
stream ran out.

“For,” said he, “if this creek here is frozen so solid, it may be that
we can walk on the ice down the cañon, and if we can, that will be
much the easiest way to travel, because then we can follow along the
stream--which is sure to bring us out somewhere--instead of climbing
over the mountains.”

“We’ll have a look,” said Jack. “But I doubt if we shall find it
frozen; the water runs at such a tremendous pace.”

Jack was right. The water was not frozen; it was just as wild as ever.
But we could walk over the top of it nevertheless. For at the very
entrance of the cañon, the stream vanished into a tunnel of snow. The
great storm had drifted the gorge half full. Resting upon the boulders
which cumbered its bed lay a heavy mass of tightly-packed snow, roofing
the stream from one end of the cañon to the other.

We might walk out of the valley whenever we chose!


[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVI

ALL ACCOUNTS SQUARED


That very day we started on our tramp into the unknown wilderness,
trusting that the stream would, as Percy had said, “bring us out
somewhere.”

Heavily laden with a week’s provisions, our rifles, two blankets each,
the axe, and last, though by no means least in importance, the little
bags of gold-washings, and leaving all the rest of our camping outfit
behind, we bade adieu to our late residence and set out, full of hope
that now indeed we were homeward bound.

Having passed over the snow bridge without accident--though Jack made
us tie ourselves together with a long rope, like Alpine climbers,
before he would venture--we found ourselves in a crooked valley of
considerable width, walled in by high mountains down whose sides came
many streams, which, uniting with the one we were following, formed a
respectable little river. Our spirits rose at the sight.

“This looks well,” said Jack. “This is a stream of some importance,
either the Gallatin, I should guess, or else one of its main branches.
If we meet with no insurmountable obstacles we shall certainly get down
to the settlements by following it.”

It was getting on for sunset, and we were beginning to look out for a
suitable camping-place, when our ears caught the sound of a dolorous
howling going on somewhere farther down the river. Ulysses did not
approve of it, for he stepped to the front, his bristles erect,
growling to himself, and walking in that stiff-legged manner dogs
assume when they see an enemy approaching.

“Wolves,” said Jack, cocking his rifle; “keep your eyes open.”

Picking our way carefully and silently, we soon came in view of a
little clearing in the woods, and there in the midst of it--a most
unexpected and most welcome sight--stood a log-cabin about the size of
the one we had that morning deserted. The door was shut, and before it
sat three grey wolves, howling in concert, as if they were serenading
the inmate of the house. At the sight of them Ulysses could contain
himself no longer. He exploded with one great bark which had been
accumulating in his chest for the past ten minutes, and instantly the
three serenaders vanished like grey shadows into the woods.

Advancing to the house, we knocked at the door.

“Who’s there?” came a shaky voice from inside.

“Three travellers,” replied Jack. “We’d like shelter for the night.”

We heard the inmate shuffle across the floor and fumble at the
fastenings of the door, which fell open on its leathern hinges,
disclosing to our view a miserable-looking specimen of humanity who
stood leaning against the door-post for support, being, seemingly, too
weak to stand upright. He was tall, hollow-cheeked, and red-eyed. His
face, which to all appearances had not been washed for a week or two,
was begrimed with dirt and “blacks” from his fire. A thin, dark beard
covered his cheeks and chin, and his hair hung down below his collar.
Added to all this, his clothes were so ragged it was a wonder he could
keep them on at all.

I did not recognize who it was until Percy, stepping forward, tapped
the spectre on the chest with his finger, and said, “Where’s your
partner, Bates?”

It _was_ Bates! The wretched, half-starved, unkempt vagabond who
staggered back, throwing up his hands before him as if to ward off an
attack, was our sometime neat and well-dressed schoolfellow.

“Don’t be afraid,” said Jack. “We don’t want to hurt you. Where’s your
partner?”

“I don’t know,” Bates began, and then, remembering himself: “Partner!
What do you mean?”

“Oh, come,” said Jack. “You might as well give up that farce. We know
all about you and your partner. We knew who you were when you captured
us the other day, though we pretended we didn’t. Where’s Morgan?”

“I don’t know,” replied Bates, as he sank down upon the ground in the
corner. “I haven’t seen him for a week or more; not since the big
storm.”

As he spoke he pressed his hand over his eyes as though he were giddy,
and then for the first time we noticed how thin his hand was; it was
like a bird’s foot.

“Why, Bates,” cried Percy, “you look half starved. Are you hungry?”

“Not very,” replied Bates. “I was yesterday and the day before, but I
seem to have got over it.”

“Why, how long since you had anything to eat?”

“Three days, I think. I lived for some days on one of those grey
wolves, but since that was finished up I’ve lived on snow, which I got
from the roof through that hole up there.”

On hearing this Percy and I bustled about to get supper ready, while
Jack, spreading our blankets upon the floor, ordered Bates to lie down
upon them, and not to say another word until he had been fed; an order
which Bates, not being able to help himself, obeyed.

The supper of bread and meat being ready, Bates was given a goodly
portion, which, with a self-control I had not expected of him, he ate
with great deliberation; and very much better he looked for it.

“Feel better, don’t you?” said Jack, seeing how the colour had come
back to his face. “Now, if you feel strong enough, I’d like to hear
how you came here, and what you have been doing since you escaped from
us in the dust-storm near Bozeman a month ago. But first of all we’ll
make a bargain with you:-- If you’ll do what you can to help us get
back our horses, we’ll say nothing about your part in the business.”

“Will you promise?” asked Bates, looking eagerly from one to the other
of us.

“Yes; we’ll promise,” we all three replied; not knowing that by so
doing we were compounding a felony--though I doubt if it would have
made any difference if we had known.

“Well, then,” said he, brightening up wonderfully, “I’ll promise
too, and I’ll tell you all about it. When we escaped from you in the
dust-storm----”

“Hold up a bit,” Jack interrupted. “I just wanted to tell you that we
had no intention of turning you over to the sheriff that time; we had
agreed to let you escape.”

“Had you?” exclaimed Bates. “I wish I’d known it; I never would have
run away, for I should have been only too glad to part company with
Morgan. Well, when we escaped that day, we rode for twenty miles
without stopping, and camped in a secluded place not far from a ranch.
In the morning Morgan watched until the people went out to the fields,
and then he slipped down to the house, and came back presently with a
bridle for his horse, a rifle and cartridges, and a piece of beef, all
of which, of course, he had stolen. Then we mounted again and rode off.
We were afraid to go back to the thieves’ den for the stolen horses,
so, at Morgan’s suggestion, we went straight up the Yellowstone River,
in the hope of being able to run off the stock of the Survey-party. We
came across a party, but whether of the Survey or not I don’t know,
and made an attempt to steal their horses; but they were too sharp for
us, and chased us up into the high mountains, where the country was so
terribly rough that we had to abandon our own horses and go afoot. We
did not know where we were, until we found ourselves one morning upon
the top of the wall, looking down into the valley of the Mushroom Rock.
Almost as soon as we recognised the place we saw two of you walk up
the valley, climb a ladder, and disappear up the mountain. As Swayne
did not appear we concluded that he--and the dog as well, perhaps--was
on guard somewhere; so, by Morgan’s advice, we descended the ladder
and took up a station among the trees whence we could watch your camp;
our idea, or, rather, Morgan’s idea being that if the sentinel should
leave his post for any reason we would slip across the valley and
escape.”

“I see,” said Jack, “and you got your chance when Tom Swayne and the
dog ran off down the valley to help Goodall.”

“Yes, that was our chance. We cut across the valley, and as your
animals were feeding near your camp we drove them in front of us up the
cañon, and there I held them against the bars while Morgan slipped back
to get a couple of saddles and bridles; and as soon as we were ready I
let down the bars, pulled aside the brush, and off we went.”

“Did Morgan upset that big rock into the gully?” asked Jack.

“Yes,” replied Bates. “His intention was to keep you down there until
he should get money for your release from the people at home. But
though I pretended to agree to this plan, my intention was to desert
Morgan at the first opportunity, give information of where you were,
and get you out. I was afraid you would starve to death if you had to
spend the winter down in that hole.”

“That was good of you,” said Jack. “What did you do next?”

“We were afraid to go near Bozeman, so we turned to the left over the
range, intending to keep clear of all towns and ride back to Utah, but
as we rode along next day, the snow coming down like a blanket,--Morgan
leading and I bringing up the rear,--my horse fell, throwing me off
upon my head. How long I lay there I don’t know, but when I recovered
I was buried completely in the snow, and Morgan and the horses were
gone. I have never seen them since. I came very near to freezing to
death, for the wind was blowing terribly, and after wandering about
for some time I came upon this cabin, and here I spent the night. Next
morning when the storm ceased I went out to collect fire-wood; for my
teeth were rattling in my head from the prolonged exposure to the cold.
I had gathered a good deal and was going out for more, when four grey
wolves made a rush at me, and I had to retreat hastily and shut the
door. They have been besieging me ever since--at least three of them
have. I couldn’t open the door an inch but one of them would make a
dash for it. That gave me an idea--after my wits had been sharpened by
going a whole day without food. I drove a stake into the ground behind
the door, so that the door would open only about eight inches. Then,
with a stout club ready in my hand, I let the door fall back against
the stake. One of the wolves jumped for the opening directly, but
his shoulders stuck, and before he could get back again I hit him a
tremendous crack upon the top of his head and killed him. He was mostly
bones, but he lasted me four days. Since then I have had nothing. The
other wolves have sat outside, waiting for me to come out, so all I
could do was to sit in here and starve.”

“Well,” said Jack, “you certainly have had a hard time of it, but you
are all right now. We’ll stay here to-morrow and give you a chance
to pick up a bit, and then you shall come on with us to Bozeman, or
wherever else we come out.”

“Thank you,” said Bates, “you are very kind.” Then, in an embarrassed,
hesitating manner, he went on: “I sha’n’t forget your kindness. I’ll
do anything I can to help you to recover your stock. And I beg your
pardons, all of you, for my part in this horse-stealing business. The
beginning of it all was my losing my money in a gambling-place. There’s
another thing I should like to mention,” he went on, after a short
pause, “though it is no concern of yours and may not interest you.
While I have been sitting here starving and thinking, I have made a
resolution. I will never bet or play cards for money again as long as I
live.”

“Good for you!” exclaimed Jack, reaching out and shaking hands with
him. “It is a pretty rough cure for gambling, but if you stick to that
resolution you will look back at this experience of yours as the most
fortunate thing that ever happened to you.”

“I’ll stick to it,” said Bates, with a very earnest countenance. “Never
fear.”

I may add that Bates did stick to it; and as Jack had prophesied, he
came to regard that hard experience as the most fortunate episode of
his life.

Our patient was so much recovered next morning that we were able to
make a short march of about ten miles, camping in a sheltered curve
of the woods which the wind had swept bare of snow, and passing a
tolerably comfortable night in spite of the cold. On the third day
after this, climbing over a high ridge, we were rejoiced to see, far
away in the distance, a wide-spreading plain, over one point of which
hung a cloud of smoke. It was the smoke made by the housewives of
Bozeman, getting dinner ready.

We were naturally much encouraged by the sight, and went into camp that
evening with the expectation that one more march would bring us to the
desired haven. As a matter of fact, it did so, but with a change in our
mode of progression we could hardly have anticipated.

When, next morning, we crawled out of our blankets, we were surprised
to find that the fire was blazing high, having been renewed, seemingly,
a couple of hours before. But this surprise was small in comparison
with the astonishment we felt when we discovered that Bates had gone;
and not only had he gone, but he had taken Ulysses with him!

It was most unaccountable. Had he gone off to explore the road? Had
he----? We hastily felt at our sides for our bags of gold-washings. No;
that was an unjust suspicion; the bags were all right. What then was
the meaning of it?

Having shouted and whistled without effect, we were proceeding to cook
our breakfast, when Ulysses bounced into camp and starting up we saw
Bates running down the hill towards us.

As soon as he could get breath enough to speak, he gasped out: “I’ve
found them! I’ve found the horses!”

“Where? How?” we all exclaimed together.

“Over the hills in that direction,” replied Bates, pointing off to the
south-west, “in a little valley about two miles away. Why Morgan has
not gone farther I don’t know; but there he is, I’m sure.”

“How came you to go over there?” inquired Jack.

“The cold woke me up this morning while it was still dark,” replied
Bates, speaking quickly and eagerly, “so I got up and put some more
logs on the fire. Just as I was going to lie down again I thought I
heard a mule bray, somewhere a long way off. Ulysses heard it, too,
for he pricked up his ears, went over to that side of the fire, and
began sniffing the breeze which blew from that direction. The sound
came again. Ulysses appeared to be much interested--though why, I could
not guess. He began to whine, and running a short distance towards the
point from which the sound came, he looked back at me as if to invite
me to go with him. As soon as I took a step forward he turned and
trotted on, looking back over his shoulder now and then to see that I
was following, and in that manner on we went, Ulysses leading, and I,
wondering where he was going, hurrying after him. It never occurred
to me that he might have recognised the mule’s voice, but I believe he
must have done so.”

“He must,” replied Jack. “And it must have been Calliope who brayed;
she is the only mule I know of whose voice will carry two miles. Go on.”

“Ulysses kept going on and I kept following, up hill and down, until we
came to a point overlooking a little valley, and there in the middle
of it were all the horses and mules, one picketed and the rest loose.
There was a shed of brush down by the stream, and the remains of a fire
smoking before it; and I have no doubt Morgan was lying asleep in the
shed.”

“I’m going over there at once,” cried Jack, full of eagerness at the
prospect of recovering his friend Toby. “I must have a try for the
horses. Will you come back and show me the place, Bates? I don’t ask
you two fellows to come--it’s dangerous.”

“Well, we’re coming, whether you ask us or not,” remarked Percy, calmly.

“All right,” assented Jack, laughing. “Come on, then. We must eat our
breakfast as we go. Bring your rifles; we’ll leave everything else
here.”

We set off at once, single file, Bates a hundred yards in the lead, and
after a tramp of about half an hour’s duration our guide stopped and
came stooping back towards us.

“He’s there all right,” said he softly, “cooking his breakfast. How are
we going to get at him? He’s right out in the middle of the valley; no
cover nearer than two hundred yards.”

“Let’s have a look,” said Jack.

Silently we crept forward, and lying flat upon the ground on the brow
of the hill, looked down into the little valley. In the middle of it
were a few scattered willows, and among them we could distinguish the
figure of a man stooping over a fire. Near him were the horses and
mules quietly feeding; one of them, which we recognised as Toby, being
picketed.

That the man was Squeaky we had no doubt, but there being no cover, as
Bates had said, we did not see how we were to come upon him unawares
and make him surrender, which was what we had hoped to do. We might
shoot him in the back, without doubt, but such a course was out of the
question, nor did it, I believe, occur to any of us.

“I’ll tell you a way of doing it,” whispered Bates. “You three go
round through the trees until you get behind him, and wait there. I’ll
walk straight down to him from here. He won’t shoot at me. I’ll get
into conversation with him, and if I can find the opportunity I’ll
capture his rifle and run off with it in your direction. If I can’t get
his rifle I’ll tackle him, and then you must run down as fast as you
can to my assistance. It is rather a mean, under-hand way of doing it,
and so, if you will, I should be glad if you would let him go again
after we have got back the horses. What do you say?”

Jack thought a little, and then shook his head.

“No, no,” said he. “It’s too dangerous. You can’t trust a fellow like
that. He thinks he has got these horses all to himself, and if you
appear he’ll suppose you have come to claim your share, and he is just
as likely as not to shoot you. It’s too risky. I won’t agree to that.”

“But, look here,” Bates argued. “I promised to do my best to help you
get your horses back, and here’s my chance. Besides, I don’t believe
he’ll shoot. At any rate I’m willing to try it.”

But Jack would not consent, and Percy and I backing up his opinion,
Bates was obliged to give in.

“You are a good fellow, Bates,” said Jack, “to be willing to take the
risk, but, you see, we are all against it. I’ll tell you another way
that I think may work; a way by which, if there is any shooting to be
done, we’ll do it--though I hope there’ll be no occasion. We will all
go round through the trees until we get behind him, and then we’ll step
out of cover and walk straight down upon him as quietly as possible.
When we get pretty close we will call upon him to surrender. If he
shows fight--why, then, I suppose we shall have to shoot. I’ll fire
first, as I’m responsible for this whole business, but if I miss you
must fire. What do you think? Would you rather keep out of the business
altogether? I sha’n’t blame you if you would.”

Though Percy and I--and Jack, too, for that matter--had the strongest
disinclination to shoot at a man, we could not leave our captain to
“go it alone,” as he plainly intended to do, and after an instant’s
hesitation we both agreed to his plan.

“All right, then,” whispered Jack. “Let us go ahead at once. Mind your
footing. Don’t make a noise. Rifles loaded? Cock ’em, then, and come
on.”

Keeping well within the trees, we started off, Jack in the lead this
time, and walking round the valley until we thought we had reached the
proper point, we halted again.

“Take your places ten feet apart,” Jack whispered. “Let me get a little
ahead.”

Creeping to the edge of the wood, he peered out, and then, beckoning to
us to follow, stepped softly into the open.

We had chosen our point well. Squeaky, sitting by the stream with his
back toward us, was perfectly unconscious of our presence. Softly we
advanced until we had covered half the intervening distance, when,
just as we began to feel confident that the enemy had been delivered
into our hands, that marplot, Toby, betrayed us. He lifted his head,
recognised Jack instantly, and greeted him with a neigh of welcome.

Up sprang Squeaky, cast one glance behind him, and bolted in among the
animals. With one jerk he pulled up the picket-pin, sprang upon Toby’s
back, and clapping his heels into the horse’s sides rode off at full
gallop.

“Stop!” shouted Jack. “I’ll fire!”

But before Jack could even take aim the matter was brought to a sudden
climax in a most unexpected manner.

Squeaky had hardly got under way when the mule, Calliope, thinking
she was about to be deserted by her beloved friend Toby, started off
at full speed in chase. She was pretty quick on her feet for a short
distance, and being unencumbered by a rider she quickly caught up
with him. The fugitive was leaning forward beside the horse’s neck,
gathering up the trailing rope with both hands, when Calliope, coming
up behind, stepped upon the picket-pin. The sudden jerk flung Squeaky
to the ground, head first,--and broke his neck!

It was with a feeling of awe that we gathered round the dead man, and
stood looking down at him; thankful that it was not by our hands he had
fallen. We were glad that we need fear him no longer, but we were far
more glad that his death--to which he had been directly led by his own
misdeeds--was due to an irresponsible mule, and not to any one of us.
Though, doubtless, we should have been fully justified, both legally
and morally, in shooting him if he had shown a disposition to shoot
at us, it would have been a grievous burden to bear through life--the
thought that we had had a hand in the killing of a human being.

[Illustration: “IT WAS WITH A FEELING OF AWE THAT WE GATHERED AROUND
THE DEAD MAN.”]

Rascal though he might have been, we felt that we could not leave
him there to the mercy of the wolves and coyotes, and after a long
pause, Jack, who had been kneeling beside the body, rose up, and said:

“We must cover him up. We can’t dig a grave, having no tools, so the
best thing we can do is to build a cairn over him. Tom, you and Percy
go up into the timber and bring down some dead poles, the biggest you
can carry, while Bates and I collect rocks.”

In the course of an hour of hard work we built a frame of timber around
and over our dead enemy, covering it with such a great pile of heavy
stones that we felt satisfied no wild animal could get at him. Then,
feeling that we had done all that lay in our power, we saddled the
horses--for we found the saddles and bridles piled near the fire--and
rode back to our own camp, whence we made all haste to Bozeman,
arriving there safely after dark that evening.

Our wanderings were ended. At last our faces were fairly turned toward
home!

It was four weeks after this that we two stood upon the deck of a great
steamship in the harbour of New York, shaking hands with Jack who had
come across the continent with us to see us safely out of the country,
as he said.

The value of our gold-washings, which Jack had sold to the smelter at
Golconda, had proved to be considerably in excess of the calculation he
had made on the waggon-sheet with the burnt stick. The sum he received
was enough not only to start up the mine again, but enough to pay all
the expenses of the trip, to buy our tickets back to England, and even
to refund the money spent by our parents for the services of Mr. Hiram
Jenkins. In fact, there was sufficient left over to buy a handsome,
brass-mounted collar for our most respected friend Ulysses; that being,
in our opinion, a more suitable present for him than the gold medal
Percy had once promised him.

“Good-bye, you fellows!” cried Jack, shaking hands with us for the last
time, as the bell rang for strangers to leave the ship. “Good-bye!
You won’t forget me, I know; and you may be very sure I’ll never
forget you. Next time you run away from home mind you run straight to
Golconda. I’ll take charge of you. Good-bye!”

With that he turned and ran across the gang-plank. The big boat moved
slowly out into the river, one last “Good-bye!” was shouted to and fro,
and Jack’s kind, brown face was lost to sight.

We had experienced many hardships since the night when Percy climbed
out of the window at Moseley’s, but the greatest of them all was the
parting with Jack.

The night was drawing in, when, some twelve days later, a dog-cart
rattled out of Southampton toward Moseley’s, and the old church clock
in the village was striking eight as the cart pulled up at the vicarage
gate. Percy and I descended from it, and having paid the driver, walked
up the pathway to the house and entered without knocking.

At the sitting-room door we paused to listen. We could distinguish
several voices inside.

“My father is here,” whispered Percy, excitedly, at the same time
digging me in the ribs with his elbow so violently that I could not
have contradicted him had I wished to do so. “And so is Sir Anthony.
Hark! He is talking now.”

He gently opened the door. As we walked in we heard Sir Anthony say,
“You may depend upon it they will bounce in upon us suddenly.” Then, as
his ear caught the click of the latch,--“And here they are!”

Dear, dear! To think that we foolish, foolish youngsters had ever run
away from such kind people as these! We were fairly smothered with
welcomes. If anything had been needed to convince us that Home was
the finest place in the world--! But what is the use of talking about
that? Every sensible boy knows that for himself; or else he is a very
unfortunate boy.

It was half-past twelve ere Sir Anthony rose to go home.

“Well, you young scapegraces,” said he, with a kindly twinkle in his
eye, as he shook hands with both of us at once, “I’m very glad to see
you safely back again. I won’t prosecute you for poaching this time--on
one condition, though. Next time you make up your minds to run away
from home, go and ask advice of your parents first. Remember, boys,”
he went on, abandoning his joking tone, and laying a hand upon the
shoulder of each of us--“Remember: Whenever you get into trouble, go
and ask advice in the right quarter. And remember, each of you, that
you never will have, and never can have, such perfect friends as your
own parents.”

“We have found that out for ourselves, sir,” said Percy.

“You have! I congratulate you. If your escapade had had no other
result it would have been worth all the hardships you have suffered
yourselves, and all the anxiety you have caused your elders to have
made such a grand discovery. You are a very fortunate pair. So,
good-night, my boys; and welcome home!”

Sir Anthony was a wise old man. I acknowledge readily and thankfully
that he was perfectly right when he said I never could have such good
friends as my own parents. At the same time, I must not omit to state
that there is a certain American--one Percy Goodall--who will always
come treading very close upon their heels.


THE END.

[Illustration]




Tales of the Heroic Ages.

By ZENAÏDE A. RAGOZIN, author of “Chaldea,” “Vedic India,” etc.

No. I.--Comprising “Siegfried, the Hero of the North,” and “Beowulf,
the Hero of the Anglo-Saxons.”

  Illustrated by Geo. T. Tobin. 12^o      $1.50

No. II.--Comprising “Frithjof, the Viking of Norway,” and “Roland, the
Paladin of France.”

  Illustrated. 12^o      $

    “The author is one who knows her subject as a scholar, and has the
    skill and imagination to construct her stories admirably. Her style
    is terse and vivid, well adapted to interest the young in these
    dignified and thrilling tales.”--_Dial._


Plutarch for Boys and Girls.

  Selected and Edited by JOHN S. WHITE. Illustrated. 8^o      $1.75

  Library edition. 2 vols. 16^o     2.50

    “It is a pleasure to see in so beautiful and elegant a form one
    of the great books of the world. The best Plutarch for young
    readers.”--_Literary World._

    “Shows admirable scholarship and judgment.”--_Critic._


Pliny for Boys and Girls.

  The Natural History of Pliny the Elder. Edited for Boys and Girls
  by JOHN S. WHITE. With 52 illustrations. 4^o      $2.00

    “Mr. White’s selections are admirably made. He has gleaned in all
    directions for his notes; and the result is one which reflects on
    him great credit, and adds another to the number of juvenile books
    which may be commended without reservation.”--_Independent._

    “For the libraries of the young--and every boy and girl in the land
    should collect a library of their own--these superb books have a
    special adaptation; they open the classics to them.”--_Boston
    Journal of Education._


Herodotus for Boys and Girls.

  Edited by JOHN S. WHITE. With 50 illustrations. 8^o      $1.75

  Library edition. 2 vols. 16^o      2.50

    “The book really contains those parts of Herodotus which a judicious
    parent would most likely have his boys and girls acquainted with,
    and Mr. White has succeeded in condensing these by omitting
    multitudes of phrases inserted in the Greek text. The print is so
    large and clear that no one need fear that it will foster a tendency
    to near-sightedness on the part of boy or girl.”--_Nation._


The Travels of Marco Polo.

  Edited for Boys and Girls, with explanatory notes and comments, by
  THOMAS W. KNOX. With over 200 illustrations. 8^o       $1.75

    “To the student of geography Marco Polo needs no introduction. He is
    revered as the greatest of all travellers in the Middle Ages, and by
    more than one careful geographer his work is believed to have led to
    the discovery of the New World by the Hardy Mariner of Genoa.... The
    story of his travels was received with incredulity, and he died
    while Europe was gravely doubting its truth. It has remained for
    later generations to establish the correctness of his narrative and
    accord him the praise he so richly deserves.”


G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS, NEW YORK AND LONDON




THE RAIL AND WATER SERIES

BY KIRK MUNROE

  Fully illustrated, 12mo, each      $1.25


I.--Under Orders. The Story of a Young Reporter.

  “It is pleasure to open a juvenile book and find in it live
  people--characters that are neither impossible paragons of goodness
  nor chimerical examples of success. Such a book is ‘Under Orders.’
  Boys who want to know what a reporter’s life is will get a fair idea
  of it from this very interesting book.”--_Buffalo Courier._

  “No one can tell a better story, or tell it in a more interesting
  manner. The book is an excellent one for boys.”--_Christian at Work._

II.--Prince Dusty. A Story of the Oil Regions.

  “This is the prince of writers for boys. He always has something
  fresh and interesting to tell them, and reaches their hearts every
  time. His books are full of adventure, yet free from exaggeration and
  sensationalism.”

[Illustration]


III.--Cab and Caboose. A Story of Railroad Life.

  “From the time Rod Blake wins the bicycle race and becomes the proud
  possessor of the Railroad Cup, all through the narrative, with its
  thrilling adventures and escapes from wreck, fire, robbers, tramps,
  and, worse than all, from an attempt to fasten a crime upon him, the
  boy readers (and surely girls too) will not find a dull page.”


IV.--The Coral Ship. A Story of the Florida Reef.

  “No one need have any hesitancy in regard to buying a book by Mr.
  Kirk Munroe, who has been justly styled ‘the prince of writers of
  books for boys,’ for he has the happiest possible faculty of being
  able to interest young people. He knows what they like to be told,
  and his books have a decided charm. The adventures narrated, while
  exciting, are real, and are not calculated to produce any unhealthy
  effect upon their readers.”


G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS, NEW YORK AND LONDON




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Superscripted characters are preceded by a carat character: 8^o.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.

  New original cover art included with this eBook is granted to the
    public domain.
